Prepared for submission to JHEP

arXiv:1907.10072v2 [hep-th] 26 Nov 2019

Searching the Landscape of Flux Vacua with
Genetic Algorithms

Alex Cole, Andreas Schachner, Gary Shiu
Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, 1150 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706,
USA

E-mail: acole4@wisc.edu, schachner@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de,
shiu@physics.wisc.edu
Abstract: In this paper, we employ genetic algorithms to explore the landscape of type
IIB flux vacua. We show that genetic algorithms can efficiently scan the landscape for
viable solutions satisfying various criteria. More specifically, we consider a symmetric T 6 as
well as the conifold region of a Calabi-Yau hypersurface. We argue that in both cases genetic algorithms are powerful tools for finding flux vacua with interesting phenomenological
properties. We also compare genetic algorithms to algorithms based on different breeding
mechanisms as well as random walk approaches.
Keywords: Flux compactifications, Superstring Vacua
ArXiv ePrint: 1907.10072

Contents
1 Introduction

1

2 Flux compactifications

4

3 Genetic algorithms
3.1 Generalities
3.2 Genetic algorithms for Flux Vacua
3.3 Schemata and fitness distance correlation

6
6
7
9

4 Calabi-Yau hypersurface
4.1 Expansion around the conifold locus
4.2 Analyzing different mutation rates
4.3 Genetic algorithm dynamics
4.4 The role of crossover
4.5 Comparing different breeding mechanisms
4.6 Comparison to a Metropolis algorithm

11
11
12
13
16
17
18

5 Symmetric T 6
5.1 Generic and special vacua
5.2 Searching for gs – Emergence of multiple schemata
5.3 Minimizing W0
5.4 Fixing mass scales

21
21
23
24
27

6 Conclusions

31

Contents
1

Introduction

Since the emergence of the string theory landscape [1–3], its predictions (and even the
existence of phenomenologically viable vacua) have remained a matter of debate [4–6].
Over the years, several approaches including systematic scans of explicit constructions and
statistical analyses have been considered for exploring the landscape [7–21]. The heart of
the problem is that the enormous number of vacua in the landscape makes a straightforward
scan computationally infeasible. The discrete landscape can be viewed as the complement of
a continuum of seemingly consistent low-energy effective field theories (EFTs) that cannot
descend from a string compactification, deemed the swampland [22, 23], see [24] for a
review. While the latter has received much attention in recent years, progress in data

–1–

science might allow for systematic studies of the landscape itself, as demonstrated with a
variety of techniques such as topological data analysis [25] and machine learning [26–35].
In this paper, we study the landscape of string vacua using Genetic Algorithms (GAs)
[36–41]. GAs search for optimal solutions to problems with huge input spaces via a natural
selection process. The population of potential solutions evolves according to the fitness
of individual members. Each individual is specified by its genotype, a string of data that
defines the member’s location in the input space. An individual’s phenotype characterizes
its properties as a solution, generally summarized by some fitness function. Via dynamics
motivated by natural selection, genetic information related to the fittest members propagates to subsequent generations. Overall, the population adapts to the extrinsic factors
implemented by the fitness.
In the past few decades, genetic algorithms have proven useful in diverse areas of
physics including particle phenomenology [42–44], astrophysics [45–47] and cosmology [48,
49]. Applications of GAs to the landscape have so far been rather limited [28, 50–55]. This is
surprising given that they are very successful in scanning large data sets for viable solutions.
Moreover, for deterministic algorithms, difficulties due to the large size of the landscape are
exacerbated by computational complexity, as can be seen in several toy models [56–59]. We
might hope to avoid some of these issues using stochastic search methods based on natural
selection processes, such as GAs. On the deep learning side, a closely related technique is
Reinforcement Learning (RL). GAs and RL are both used to train machine agents to solve
complex tasks in uncertain environments [60, 61].
Ultimately, we are interested in selecting vacua based on their phenomenological properties such as the cosmological constant or certain desirable low energy spectra and couplings. As a first step, we focus in this paper on three such quantities: the string coupling,
the superpotential value in the stabilized vacua, and the moduli masses. Nonetheless, it
is straightforward to extend our GA analysis to other contexts. Methods along the lines
outlined in this paper can be used e.g. to test the WGC [62] (and its various strong forms
[63–68]). As a proof of concept, the problems addressed in this paper are not too computationally intensive, so all the algorithms we used can be implemented in Mathematica.
However, it is worth mentioning that there are many publicly available packages for GAs
written for different platforms, see e.g. [69–72]1 .
In this paper, we explore the type IIB flux landscape, for which our genetic algorithms
are (mostly) based on the following identifications, see also Tab. 1.1. The members of a
population are distinct string vacua, each determined by a choice of (integer-quantized)
fluxes. In other words, the chromosomes are flux vectors of maximal length 4(h(2,1) + 1)
characterizing the genotype of a vacuum. Solving the F-term constraints for these fluxes
determines the VEVs of the various moduli and gives the phenotype of a vacuum. The
corresponding fitness is a function of physical observables including masses and couplings.
Parent vacua are selected according to their fitness, and breed pairwise to construct child
vacua. Parents breed via a crossover procedure where parts of one chromosome are replaced
1

For a maintained list of packages
http://geneticprogramming.com/software/.

for

–2–

genetic

programming

in

general,

see

Genetic Algorithms

Landscape

individuals
chromosome
alleles
phenotype
fitness
boundary conditions

flux vacua
flux vector
fluxes
masses, couplings, etc.
function of masses, couplings, etc.
SUSY condition, gauge fixing, tadpole

Table 1.1: Dictionary relating terms used in the context of GAs and the flux landscape
by the corresponding parts of a mate’s chromosome. Additionally, mutation modifies some
fluxes at random. After solving the F-flatness conditions and checking gauge inequivalence
and the size of tadpoles, we can define a new population by choosing an appropriate number
of child vacua as our subsequent generation.
Repeating the above steps for many generations results in a population gathering
around a point of maximal fitness, i.e., vacua satisfying physical conditions specified by
the fitness. Moreover, we find that GAs are significantly more efficient at finding physical
solutions than randomly choosing fluxes. In other words, GAs are inherently superior to
brute force approaches. This is a hint that the algorithm exploits some underlying structure
of the flux landscape that is unknown at the outset of the search. This learning of structure
can be confirmed by studying the “shapes” of individual generations using persistent homology, a technique previously applied to the landscape in [25]. Exploitation of this structure
leads to improved efficiency of a GA compared to simulated annealing, see Sect. 4.6.
GAs, or stochastic search algorithms in general, are not effective for “needle-in-ahaystack” type problems. These problems do not allow for a distinction between incorrect
solutions. In other words, all incorrect solutions are equally bad, so the performance of a
GA is reduced to that of a random scan. Turning this around, it is important that a GA
is searching a fitness landscape that is pseudo-continuous. Stated differently, there should
exist a neighborhood around the optimal solution in which the fitness is well-behaved.
This can be quantified by considering the fitness-distance correlation [73, 74] with distance
measured in the input space.
In general, stochastic search algorithms are efficient when the fitness landscape exhibits
a funnel-like topography (see [75], and recently in the context of the landscape [76]), so
that the optimal solution can be approached via small steps. This encodes itself in a large
and negative fitness-distance correlation near the optimal solution, see Sect. 3.3. Strictly
speaking, the viability of a given search algorithm is determined empirically. If a solution
or near-solution is found, the algorithm may be considered successful. If a solution is not
found, either it does not exist, or it is not readily accessible to the algorithm at hand.
In the latter case, computing the fitness-distance correlation can demonstrate the lack
of a favorable funnel topography. This can sometimes be ameliorated by an alternative
choice of problem encoding [77], but in general finding an efficient encoding requires solving
the problem itself (in which case no search algorithm is necessary) or finding successful

–3–

deterministic heuristics, which we aim to avoid due to its problem-specific nature.
In the presence of a fitness landscape the flow of the population shows a strong pull on
certain observables so that the population quickly gathers around suitable solutions. This
behavior typically depends on the precise definition of the fitness itself, especially when considering several search parameters. In contrast, “needle-in-a-haystack” situations can only
randomly sample the space of solutions since unwanted solutions cannot be distinguished.
As we will see, all models considered in this paper do not belong to the class of a “needlein-a-haystack”. It has previously been argued that due to the structure and correlations
within the landscape GAs are expected to work well more generally [55]. It seems therefore
promising to us that GAs constitute valuable tools to systematically study the landscape.
This paper is organized as follows. First, we review the construction of flux vacua
in type IIB compactifications in Section 2. We then collect the basic principles of genetic
algorithms in Section 3. Subsequently, we define an algorithm suitable for studying type IIB
flux compactifications. Afterwards, we apply our algorithm to two examples: a hypersurface
in the weighted projective space WP41,1,1,1,4 (Section 4) and the symmetric T 6 (Section 5).
We conclude in Section 6.

2

Flux compactifications

In this section, we briefly review type IIB flux compactifications on Calabi-Yau orientifolds
in the presence of background fluxes, see [78, 79] for reviews. In these setups, 3-form fluxes
stabilize the axio-dilaton and complex structure moduli. Due to flux quantization and
tadpole cancellation, the resulting space of vacuum solutions is a discretuum distributed
over the moduli space [1, 80].
We follow the conventions of [81]. Consider a Calabi-Yau threefold M with h(2,1)
complex structure moduli. We take a symplectic basis {Aa , Bb } for the b3 = 2h(2,1) + 2
three-cycles, with a, b = 1, . . . , h(2,1) + 1. The dual cohomology elements αa , β b satisfy
Z
Z
Z
αa ∧ β b = δab .
(2.1)
β a = −δba ,
αb = δba ,
Aa

Bb

M

From the unique holomorphic three-form Ω, we define the periods z a ≡
which form the b3 -vector Π(z) ≡ (Gb , z a ). Additionally
Z
Ω ∧ Ω = z a Ga − z a G a = −Π† · Σ · Π

R

Aa Ω, Gb ≡

R

Bb Ω,

(2.2)

M

in terms of the symplectic matrix
Σ=

0 1
−1 0

!
(2.3)

whose entries are (h(2,1) + 1) × (h(2,1) + 1) matrices. The RR and NSNS 3-form fluxes are
quantized and can be expanded in the α, β basis as
F3 = −(2π)2 α0 (fa αa + fa+h(2,1) +1 β a ),

H3 = −(2π)2 α0 (ha αa + ha+h(2,1) +1 β a ) .

–4–

(2.4)

Here, f and h are two integer-valued b3 -vectors. From now on we set (2π)2 α0 = 1 and define
N = f1 , . . . , f2h(2,1) +2 , h1 , . . . , h2h(2,1) +2

T

(2.5)

for later purposes. The fluxes induce a superpotential for the complex structure moduli
and axio-dilaton φ ≡ C0 + ie−ϕ , given by [82]
Z
W=
G3 ∧ Ω(z) = (f − φh) · Π(z) .
(2.6)
M

In type IIB supergravity the 3-form fluxes only appear in the combination G3 ≡ F3 − φH3 .
The tree-level N = 1 F-term scalar potential induced by 3-form fluxes is of no-scale
type, given by


V = eK Kab̄ Da W Db̄ W + Kφφ̄ Dφ W Dφ̄ W .
(2.7)
Here, Kab̄ is the inverse Kähler metric on complex structure moduli space and Da W =
(∂za + (∂za K))W the associated Kähler derivative (similarly for φ). The corresponding
mass matrix for the real scalar fields is given by
MIJ = ∂I ∂J V

(2.8)

evaluated at a minimum of V with I, J ∈ {Re(za ), Im(za ), Re(φ), Im(φ)}.
We are interested in vacua with vanishing F-terms
1
(f − φh) · Π(z) = 0 ,
φ−φ

(2.9)

Da W = (f − φh) · (∂a Π(z) + Π(z)∂a K) = 0

(2.10)

Dφ W =

The Kähler potential for the axio-dilaton and complex structure moduli is given by
 Z


K = − log i
Ω ∧ Ω − log −i(φ − φ)
M
†

= − log(−iΠ · Σ · Π) − log(−i(φ − φ))

(2.11)

The F-flatness conditions (2.9) and (2.10) imply that the (3,0) and (1,2) parts of the fluxes
vanish, so that G3 is imaginary self-dual, ?6 G3 = iG3 .
The D3-brane charge induced by the fluxes can be written as
Z
Nflux =
F3 ∧ H3 = f · Σ · h .
(2.12)
M

One can show that Nflux > 0 for imaginary self-dual fluxes. Hence, negative D3-brane
charges have to appear to ensure tadpole cancellation. These negative charges can be
induced by orientifolding. In this paper, we will not be explicit about orientifolding. We
will rather take Lmax as an adjustable parameter and, along the lines of [7, 8, 81], consider
solutions with
0 < Nflux ≤ Lmax

–5–

(2.13)

with remaining charge cancelled by mobile D3-branes. As shown in [25], Lmax sets the scale
at which interesting structure in the moduli space distribution appears.
It is crucial that we fix gauge symmetries relating equivalent vacua when running our
GA. Otherwise, we might end up with redundancies in our population of vacua. In our case,
the symmetry group is given by G = SL(2, Z)φ × Γ where SL(2, Z)φ is the S-duality group
from type IIB and Γ is the modular group acting on the complex structure moduli space.
We choose a gauge-fixing prescription in which each vacuum is mapped to the corresponding
fundamental domain where we have to keep track of all fluxes. Throughout, we will consider
the evolution of stabilized VEVs for the axio-dilaton and complex structure moduli, and
functions thereof.

3

Genetic algorithms

In this section, we collect the necessary ingredients to study genetic algorithms in the context of string compactifications, see also [39, 42, 55] for more pedagogical introductions. We
begin with a brief summary of GAs. Afterwards, we turn to applications to flux vacua and
describe the algorithm applied in the remainder of this paper. We also highlight novel complications encountered when using GAs to search the landscape, namely that consistency
conditions are not necessarily preserved by the breeding process. Finally, we elaborate
further on the suitability and performance of GAs in the context of flux compactifications.
3.1

Generalities

A GA in the sense of [36, 38] can be described as follows. One begins with a population
of p randomly chosen individuals, each specified by a string of data referred to as the
chromosome. The chromosome describes the defining input parameters of each individual,
thereby encoding the individual’s genotype. The chromosome consists of alleles whose
number and values depend on the model in question. Typically, for alleles taking values in
a smaller range, a smaller population size can be chosen, see the discussion in Sect. 3.2. The
physical characteristics of a member, also called its phenotype, are obtained by computing
functions of the genotype. In a physics context, this typically corresponds to a set of
physical observables like masses, couplings, or representations. Now, the algorithm proceeds
by repeating the following three steps.
First, the process of selection is introduced by declaring certain individuals to be more
competitive for breeding than others. This is typically achieved by collecting pairs where
the single members in a pair are referred to as parents. As in nature, specific individuals
have physical properties distinguishing them from the typical individual and making them
more likely to procreate. This preeminence can be taken into account by assigning to each
member a fitness based on the phenotype.
Several ways to define the fitness as well as various selection methods have been discussed in the literature, see e.g. [83–97]. In this paper, we mostly focus on the so-called
roulette-wheel selection, but see Sect. 5.4. Here, one normalizes the fitness function to
be a probability distribution. Pairs are constructed by choosing individuals according to

–6–

this probability distribution. Note that this method of parent selection explicitly takes
self-reproduction into account.
Secondly, individuals breed to construct a new population, made up of members called
children. This is achieved by splicing the two chromosomes of a single pair together. We
typically employ a two-point crossover where the parent chromosomes are both cut at the
same two randomly selected positions, swapping the middle sections. Afterwards, we pick
one of the two new chromosomes at random as the genotype of a new individual in the
descendant population.
Thirdly, and this is the major feature responsible for the efficiency of genetic algorithms,
the children’s chromosomes are altered by mutation. More specifically, for randomly selected
children, a fraction of random alleles, typically about 1%, are modified. This is necessary to
prevent the algorithm from stagnation. For example, the population can cluster around a
local maximum of the fitness, even though a better global maximum is available. The algorithm might never gain knowledge of the latter without mutation. In this sense, mutation
should not be viewed as a tool to increase convergence, but more crucially as an integral
part of the algorithm itself. Along these lines, we will compare different mutation rates
within a simple example in Sect. 4.2. Taking the population size p to remain constant2 ,
the new population is obtained by taking all children, replacing the least fit individual
found after mutation with the fittest individual from the previous population. This last
step, called elitist selection, forces the maximum fitness to increase monotonically with each
generation.
The above three steps form a generation. We repeat them several times, until a limiting
rate of convergence is reached. In general, only a certain fraction of the population can
reach the optimal solution, see e.g. the discussion in Sect. 1.2 of [55].
3.2

Genetic algorithms for Flux Vacua

In this section we translate the general notion of GAs into the language of type IIB flux
compactifications. Throughout this section we employ a notation where hOiA denotes the
vacuum expectation value of some quantity O computed by solving the F-flatness conditions
for the fluxes NA .
A population of size p is a set of flux vacua VA , A = 1, . . . , p, obtained by solving the
F-term constraints Da W = 0 = Dφ W, a = 1, . . . , h(2,1) , and fixing the gauge redundancy.
Apart from intrinsic geometric quantities specified by the choice of a compactification space,
T
input parameters are only flux numbers NA = NA1 , . . . , NA2b3 (recall eq. (2.5)), i.e.,

VA = V (NA ) = V NA1 , . . . , NA2b3 .

(3.1)

More specifically, VA encodes all elementary information about the vacuum which corresponds in our case to the VEVs of all moduli fields hza iA and the axio-dilaton hφiA . Hence,
each vacuum VA has physical attributes including
2

Increasing p dynamically during the evolution comes at the expense of increased computational
effort. Moreover, the rate of convergence is not improved as long as we start with a large population,
see also Sect. 3.2.

–7–

• VEVs hza iA , hφiA
• the value of Nflux (NA )
• the value of W0 (NA ) = hWiA , the string coupling and the moduli masses.
These characteristics specify the vacuum’s location in moduli space, the tadpole as well as
various mass scales etc. Initially, we choose a certain number of fluxes at random, whereas
fluxes of any descendant population are determined through the pairing process (see below).
It is crucial that we restrict the tadpole such that Nflux ≤ Lmax , albeit we do not fix it to a
certain value. Otherwise, the population might be driven towards solutions with arbitrarily
large tadpole. Restricting the size of our tadpole may present limits to the sorts of vacua
accessible to our algorithm. For example, it has been noted that in some examples F-term
constraints force vacua at weak coupling, large complex structure, and large volume to have
large Nflux [98].
The fitness can be used to find vacua with certain values for the VEVs or functions
thereof, such as W0 , which we collectively denote O(i) in this section. For a fixed compactification space, the fitness of some vacuum VA will be a function of the fluxes, FA = F (NA ).
Say we are interested in vacua with values O(i),∗ for some observables O(i) . (Throughout
this paper, we denote with the superscript ∗ the optimal solution within our GA.) We
(i)
write the value of the observable O(i) in the vacuum VA as OA = hO(i) iA . We define the
associated fitness FA of VA as
"
#
1 X
(i)
(i),∗
(i)
FA =
wi fi (OA , O
, δO ) + b .
(3.2)
N
i

P
Here, we introduce weights wi and a normalisation factor N so that
A FA = 1. We
(i)
typically choose fi to be a Gaussian of width δO , but other choices also work well. The
offset b is necessary to prevent FA from localizing around a local maximum of one of the
fi . In general, we have to keep in mind that several of the O(i) could be correlated. Thus,
it also has to be checked that the required values O(i),∗ are compatible with each other.
Finally, the dynamics of the algorithm is generically highly sensitive to the choice of weights
wi .
Using the fitness, we generate a set of pairs (VA , VB ) of vacua. We allow the two
vacua in a pair to be identical. We typically take some number P > p of random pairs,
large enough to guarantee enough gauge-inequivalent solutions after breeding satisfying
tadpole constraints. This is a minor setback compared to the general algorithm described
in Sect. 3.1. There is typically no way to tell whether a pair leads to a viable solution a
priori. Still, random search algorithms face similar problems in this context, while they
do not benefit from the crucial interplay of selection, crossover and mutation. Thus, we
expect our algorithm to be more efficient than a Monte-Carlo procedure, notwithstanding
the aforementioned difficulties.
A child vacuum vC is constructed from a pair (VA , VB ) in the following way. First,
we construct a new string of fluxes along the lines of Sect. 3.1. That is, the new genotype

–8–

3 T
nC = (n1C , . . . , n2b
C ) is given by


T
nC = NA1 , . . . , NAk1 , NBk1 +1 , . . . , NBk2 , NAk2 +1 , . . . , NA2b3

(3.3)

where k1 , k2 ∈ {1, . . . , 2b3 }, k1 ≤ k2 , are two randomly chosen integers. Mutations are
applied by replacing a certain number of fluxes by some new random value. We introduce
the mutation rate qmut and perform a mutation on nmut flux numbers of a single individual
whenever q < qmut for a randomly chosen number q ∈ [0, 1].
Next, all newly obtained strings of fluxes are plugged into the F-term constraints to
judge whether they meet all relevant criteria. More specifically, we have to check the existence of solutions, the size of the flux-induced D3-charge Nflux as well as gauge inequivalence.
Finally, the new genotype potentially results in a well-defined vacuum vC = V (nC ).
A new population is defined as a random choice of p children vC . As mentioned above,
it is hence mandatory that the previous step leads to more than p inequivalent vacua by
initially generating P > p pairs. Having defined the population of the next generation, we
can continue by computing the associated fitness of each member and going through the
same steps again.
We also have to think about the initial population size. We typically restrict to tadpoles
smaller than some flux scale Lmax and compute the relevant quantities. Since genetic
algorithms are designed to find the global maximum of the fitness function, it is necessary
to have access to all the parameter space. This means that every allele should include every
possible flux choice. We restrict to fluxes in the interval [−Lmax , Lmax ] for simplicity.3 If
we take the population size to satisfy
p ≥ (2Lmax + 1) 4(h(2,1) + 1) ,

(3.4)

then this is most certainly true. This is obviously a very naive estimate, but we expect it
to be sufficient for the level of our discussion.
3.3

Schemata and fitness distance correlation

We call the space parametrized by the Oi the search space, in contrast to the parameter
space of fluxes N. A GA converges in search space, but not necessarily in parameter space.
(i)
By this we mean that the final population is dominated by members for which OA is close
to the optimal solution. More specifically, for two solutions we find
(i)

(i)

|OA − OB | . 2δO(i) ,

(3.5)

while the distance in parameter space can be arbitrarily large. (This is because the mapping
from fluxes to fitness is not one-to-one.) However, a notion of convergence in parameter
space also turns out to be useful. As explained in [55], convergence in parameter space
occurs for some variables which form so-called schemata, as introduced by Holland [36].
3

This is typically sufficient for the examples considered here since there are almost no solutions
beyond these limits, cf. the discussion at the end of Sect. 4.3.2 and the second paragraph of Sect. 5.4
in [81].

–9–

Although Holland’s idea has been criticized over the years4 , it gives a nice understanding of
the generic evolution within a GA, albeit being incomplete. Schemata are characterized by
a prototypical behavior of GAs which is that certain parameters quickly converge towards
one unifying value. To be more precise, schemata represent the crucial features being
favorable characteristics of the optimal solution. This can be interpreted as the fact that
a small collection of alleles dominate the fitness. As soon as their values are adjusted
correspondingly for the majority of the population, the breeding procedure does not affect
them anymore. The formal study of schemata results in the following two conclusions.
First, the entire population never quite reaches the optimal solution. This is related to
the observation that schemata never touch every single individual, see Sect. 1.2 in [55].
Secondly, mutation plays a crucial role in identifying the best schema. As we will see
further below, it forces the algorithm to pick out one schema associated to the “global”
maximum of F . It is important to note that in our case we may not reach the true global
maximum, since we typically restrict to certain corners of flux space.
One string-theoretic example where we might expect the domination of various schema
is the toy problem of generating fluxes satisfying the tadpole cancellation condition (2.13).
For large flux integers (relative to Lmax ), satisfying (2.13) requires cancellations between
various flux contributions. The various ways flux contributions can cancel represent different
(approximate) schema for a search for tadpole-satisfying configurations.
To study the efficiency of GAs for our problems, we consider the `1 -distance from an
individual to the fittest individual of a generation in flux space,
4(h(2,1) +1)

DA =

X

k
|NAk − Nref
|.

(3.6)

k=1

Here Nref is the flux associated to a generation’s fittest individual. Recall that this member
is carried over to the next generation due to elitist selection. Thus, Nref is only replaced
if there appears a member of even greater fitness. In the literature on GAs [73, 74]5 , the
utility of a GA for a given problem can be quantified by the fitness distance correlation
(FDC)6
p
1 X (FA − F̄ )(DA − D̄)
F DC =
.
(3.7)
p
σF σD
A=1

4

Based on a more mathematical formulation of GAs, it appears misleading to regard static
building blocks as being an intrinsic part of the algorithm’s evolution, rather than an artefact of
the fitness function. In general, these building blocks change dynamically from one generation to
the next, cf. Chs. 3 and 10 of [96] for a comprehensive discussion. Nonetheless, we generically
observe frozen subsets of fluxes characterizing certain regions in moduli space.
5
See also [55] for a discussion of FDC in a physics context.
6
Notice however that in the present context establishing the FDC in the original sense seems
out of reach. This is because DA is in the literature assumed to be the distance to the nearest
global maximum. To compute DA in this case, we would have to know about the position of every
solution in advance. If this were the case, we would have started with a deterministic approach
right from the beginning. As previously noted, models motivated by string compactifications are
most probably NP-hard. We are therefore using a different definition of DA which will allow us to
judge whether certain questions are GA-hard or GA-easy.

– 10 –

Here, F̄ is the average fitness, D̄ is the average distance, and σF , σD are the corresponding
standard deviations. One infers that models with
• 0.15 ≤ F DC ≤ 1 are GA-hard. This class of models is not tackled well by GAs since
the fitness correlates with the distance, i.e., the fitness grows with distance.
• −0.15 ≤ F DC ≤ 0.15 are difficult, that is, there is (almost) no correlation between
fitness and distance.
• −1 ≤ F DC ≤ −0.15 are GA-easy. The anti-correlation of fitness and distance implies
that the fitness is maximized as the global optimum is approached. Hence, these tasks
are suitable for running a GA.
When using the algorithm described in Sect. 3.2, it can be useful to fix certain parameters, while keeping others dynamical. For instance, the width or support of our fitness
function can be chosen to decrease to force the population to adapt more and more to
a certain value. This is especially helpful when trying to find vacuum solutions sharing
certain properties at a given level of accuracy.
To summarize, we can expect the initial population to quickly approach the optimal
solution due to the emergence of schemata. Subsequently, there is period of minor adjustments of the remaining flux parameters.

4

Calabi-Yau hypersurface

In this section, we first review the definition of the hypersurface in question. Next, we
explain the general characteristics of our GA. We compare the results to GAs with different
breeding mechanisms and to a Metropolis algorithm. We perform only a single search here
before we come to more interesting applications in the upcoming section.
4.1

Expansion around the conifold locus

In this section we investigate a Calabi-Yau threefold arising as a hypersurface in the
weighted projective space WP41,1,1,1,4 , defined by
4
X

x8i + 4x20 − 8ψx0 x1 x2 x3 x4 = 0 .

(4.1)

i=1

Its Hodge numbers are given by h(1,1) = 1 and h(2,1) = 149. We focus on the orientifold
taking x0 → −x0 , ψ → −ψ along with worldsheet parity reversal, which arises from Ftheory compactified on a Calabi-Yau fourfold defined as a hypersurface in WP51,1,1,1,8,12 .
This amounts to tadpole with Lmax = 972 [99]. As described in [81, 99, 100], (4.1) has a
discrete symmetry group Γ = Z28 × Z2 , and any complex structure deformation except the
ψ-term is charged under Γ. By working in a regime where only fluxes consistent with Γ are
turned on, we can neglect these charged moduli and consistently solve for the periods for
the axio-dilaton φ and uncharged modulus ψ.

– 11 –

We are particularly interested in flux vacua near the conifold point ψ = 1, for which
the periods can be written in terms of x = 1 − ψ, |x|  1, as [100]


G1 (x) = (2πi)3 a0 + a1 x + O(x2 ) ,


z 2 (x)
G2 (x) =
ln(x) + (2πi)3 b0 + b1 x + O(x2 ) ,
2πi


z 1 (x) = (2πi)3 c0 + c1 x + O(x2 ) ,


z 2 (x) = (2πi)3 d0 + d1 x + O(x2 ) .

(4.2)

Here, the constants b0 , d0 ∈ R, a0 , a1 , d1 ∈ iR and b1 , c0 , c1 ∈ C can be found in Sect. 5.1 of
[100]. To first order in x ≡ 1 − ψ, the F-flatness conditions result in
f1 a0 + f2 b0 + f3 c0
+ O(|x| ln |x|) ,
h1 a0 + h2 b0 + h3 c0
"
µ1
µ1
2πi (f1 − φh1 )(a1 − µ0 a0 ) + (f2 − φh2 )(b1 − µ0 b0 )
ln(x) = −
+
d1
f2 − φh2
#
(f3 − φh3 )(c1 − µµ01 c0 ) + (f4 − φh4 )d1
− 1.
f2 − φh2
φ=

(4.3)

(4.4)

Using Monte Carlo simulations, the authors of [100] explicitly showed that vacua cluster
near the conifold point, confirming the expectation from the continuous flux approximation
of [7].
In the remainder of this section, we perform all algorithms with
Lmax = 972 ,

L = 100 .

(4.5)

Since we work in the conifold regime, the VEV of the complex structure modulus x is
typically driven towards tiny values. This is because the flux vacua cluster around the
conifold point.
4.2

Analyzing different mutation rates

Let us now find flux vacua with a certain value of the superpotential W0 . This can be
relevant when, e.g., looking for vacua that are applicable for any of the three branches of
Kähler moduli stabilisation, namely KKLT [101], LVS [102] or Kähler uplifting [103], which
generically require |W0 |  1, |W0 | & 1 and |W0 | ∼ O(1 . . . 10) respectively. For simplicity,
we only search for a specific absolute value of |W0 |, although fixing real and imaginary
separately is also within the capabilities of our GA. In the following, we use W0 to denote
the absolute value of the superpotential. We run the algorithm with the parameters
W0∗ = 50000 ,

δW = 2000 ,

p = 1000 ,

Ngen = 50 .

(4.6)

Here, we choose not to apply any crossover, but restrict to the effects of selection and
mutation. As we will see in the remainder of this paper, this is already sufficient to find
(presumably local) fitness maxima. We discuss the impact of crossover on these results in

– 12 –

Figure 1: Number of members in neighborhoods of radius r = 500 around W0∗ for zero,
one or two mutations and different mutation rates.
Sect. 4.4. To guarantee the optimal outcome for a GA, it is necessary to adjust the number
of mutations as well as the mutation rate. Here, we run our algorithm several times with
nmut mutations per mutated child and mutation rate qmut .
In order to find the optimal mutation scheme, we compare the convergence around
a fixed neighborhood around W0∗ , cf. Fig. 1. First of all, we observe that applying two
mutations per child (purple line) results in an insufficient convergence rate. This behavior
is no surprise because, having only 8 independent fluxes to begin with, two mutations
overshadow the underlying structure of the optimal solution. In contrast, one mutation
results in a seemingly stable evolution over all generations with high convergence rate.
Moreover, by comparing the yellow and green line in Fig. 1 we deduce that the search for
W0 considered in this section does not seem to strongly depend on qmut . Nonetheless, we
emphasize that it is crucial to scan over different mutation rates in all examples discussed
below. Otherwise, the GA’s ability to find certain schemata associated to the optimal
solution is undermined.
All in all, we conclude that mutation really is an essential ingredient for the success of
our algorithm. For our purposes at most one flux mutation per individual seems to be a
good guess. However, the mutation rate has to be adjusted accordingly to guarantee the
optimal outcome. As we will see below, this typically depends on the specific task.
4.3

Genetic algorithm dynamics

After having investigated different mutation rates, we describe the generic features of a
GA’s evolution. We proceed by running the algorithm using
W0∗ = 50000 ,

δW = 2000 ,

p = 1000 ,

Ngen = 100 ,

qmut = 0.5 .

(4.7)

In practice, we are interested in solutions that approximately satisfy W0 ≈ W0∗ up to small
deviations. We therefore decrease δW after 50 generations by 50% every 20 generations.
In doing so, we change the fitness landscape and induce an additional force on the flow of
the population. As we will see below, this allows us to find about 93% of the flux vacua
localized in the range [W0∗ − 50, W0∗ + 50].

– 13 –

Figure 2: Number of individuals within different ranges around W0∗ .
Fig. 2 shows the number of individuals in neighborhoods of different sizes r around the
optimal solution. During the first 50 generations with δW = 2000, we observe a sharp incline
of the blue and orange curve corresponding to r = 1000 and r = 750 respectively. Hence,
the population quickly moves towards the optimal solution, but remains mostly outside a
neighborhood with r = 500. After decreasing δW, we observe another sharp incline, but
this time in the green (r = 500) and red (r = 250) curve. In the final population about
93% of individuals have the optimal value of W0 to an accuracy of 0.1%.
We show the distribution of our population in the gs -W0 -plane on the left of Fig. 3.
At the beginning, the population (blue dots) is randomly scattered across random values
of W0 and gs . After 40 generations, the distribution of W0 and gs exhibits a clear structure
in the sense that the individuals around W0∗ form almost straight lines in gs -direction. As
expected for GAs, a certain fraction of individuals is found far away from the optimal
solution. However, the majority of vacua strongly clusters around W0∗ which is clearly
visible from Fig. 3. After having decreased δW, the distribution of the final population
leaves only one of the previous gs -lines present which is closest to W0∗ . We interpret this
behavior as an indication of improved convergence related to the reduction of δW. The FDC
(3.7) averaged over all generations results in FDC = −0.53 which is within the GA-easy
regime. This is in good agreement with the above qualitative observations. Thus, we find
reason to believe that our definition of an approximate notion of FDC (3.6) is well-suited
for our purposes.
Next, let us consider the distribution of φ in the fundamental domain as depicted on the
right hand side of Fig. 3. Interestingly, after 40 generations the flux vacua mostly align with
straight lines pointing towards the origin. These lines seemingly form a symmetric pattern.
On top of that, short vertical lines appear at the outer region of the fundamental domain.
This pattern survives until the termination of the algorithm and, even more importantly, is
enforced during the evolution. We interpret this result as the manifestation of the schemata
associated to the optimal value of W0 . That is, the chromosomes of individual fluxes share
specific properties that result in the observed alignment of φ-VEVs. This interpretation is

– 14 –

Figure 3: Distribution of gs , W0 and φ for three generations.
further supported by comparing different crossover and breeding mechanisms in the next
two sections.
To understand these results further, we use persistent homology to analyze the topological structure of the distribution in flux space, applying the methods used in [25, 104], see
also [105–110] for more elaborate introductions. Persistent homology has previously been
used to characterize distributions of string vacua, and identify loci in moduli space related

– 15 –

Figure 4: Persistence diagram for the population in the initial (left) and final (right)
generation in flux space.
to phenomenologically interesting properties.
Applied to the scenario under consideration, we compare the flux distributions of populations at different generations during the GA’s evolution. We specifically consider the
persistence diagrams associated to the data set of fluxes for a single generation. These
diagrams encode the two scales at which certain higher-dimensional topological features in
the set of fluxes first emerge and vanish. In Fig. 4, we compare the flux configurations of
the initial (top) and the final (bottom) population.7 The plot on the top shows a lot of
structure in terms of the presence of various k-cycles, albeit most die very quickly. Randomly choosing the initial fluxes results in regions of non-trivial topology. In contrast, the
distribution of the final population on the bottom of Fig. 4 does not show much topologically interesting structure. Moreover, the majority of observed features are very short-lived
in terms of the associated scales. This indicates that (most) fluxes form a cluster which
does not exhibit any non-trivial topological properties at large scales.
4.4

The role of crossover

The takeaway message of the previous section is that a GA can be applied even without
performing any crossover. The true power of GAs typically comes only to light when
having a dynamical interaction of selection, crossover and mutation. In the remainder of
this section, we would like to contrast different choices for running the GA. For instance, one
can consider various crossover operators at the same time to increase the GA’s performance.
This is necessary since different tasks generally require the application of suitable crossover
procedures. Here, we restrict to a 2-point crossover operator as explained in Sect. 3.2.
Using the same initial population as previously, we find the evolution depicted as the
orange line in Fig. 5. If we compare the blue (no crossover) and orange (2-point crossover)
7

More specifically, we consider the distribution of constrained fluxes, cf. Sect. 4.5 for details.
These fluxes are eventually fixed by evolution of the GA. Restricting to the constrained fluxes allows
one to observe the emergence of schemata during the GA’s evolution.

– 16 –

Figure 5: The number of individuals within a range of 500 around W0∗ for the algorithms
of Sects. 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5.
line, we observe that applying a non-trivial crossover operator leads to a more stable evolution, especially at early stages. Recall that we reduce the support of the fitness at generation
50. At this point of the GA’s evolution without crossover the population seemingly feels
a strong pull towards the optimal solution. In contrast, the convergence rate with 2-point
crossover increases almost monotonically. Thus, although the final population is qualitatively the same, we find significant difference in the overall evolution.
The previously mentioned structures in Fig. 3 emerge with 2-point crossover as well
which is a strong indication for a characteristic feature associated to the optimal solution,
see the discussion in the upcoming section. We also analyzed the resulting distribution of
constrained fluxes in the spirit of the previous section. Indeed, the persistence diagram for
the final population mirrors the results of Fig. 4.
4.5

Comparing different breeding mechanisms

There is another way of implementing a genetic algorithm which might be useful when large
input parameters appear. Recall that, in order to guarantee that the algorithm can access
most of the landscape, we have to ensure that the whole range of alleles appears within
each individual locus of a chromosome. This means that the necessary population size
scales with the maximally allowed allele. Hence, it might be useful to interpret each flux
as a single chromosome by encoding it in a binary form. As opposed to the breeding and
crossover mechanism explained in Sect. 3.2, we now perform crossovers for each individual
flux. That is, we act on 8 strings of zeros and ones. It is expected that the necessary
population size is drastically reduced in this way. In fact, one finds that for a chromosome
of length ` [55]


1
−`
pmin ≈ 1 +
log
(4.8)
log(2)
log(P∗ )
with P∗ being the probability with which every allele should appear at each locus at least
once. This is generally much smaller than the minimum population size for alleles taking
values in [−Lmax , Lmax ].

– 17 –

In this section, we compare the performance of both methods, applying 0- and 2-point
crossover for the same population size p = 1000.8 First, the overall evolution is very alike
to the distribution shown in Fig. 3. It is worth mentioning that the observed pattern in the
distribution of φ-VEVs also emerges here independently of whether we perform 0- or 2-point
crossover. Thus, we are convinced that this linear structure is not related to the applied
crossover procedure, but rather a property of the vacua close to the optimal solution.
In Fig. 5, we see that there are only minor differences in the overall performance.
Hence, this way of performing crossovers and mutations might be advantageous in higherdimensional models than considered here. The point is that solving the equations of motion
in high-dimensional spaces is computationally very costly. Thus, working with smaller
population sizes provides a welcome reduction in computational expense.
As before, we observe a strong clustering also for the case of binary crossover. This
becomes apparent by performing a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the final population. In general, PCA is useful for determining sets of linearly uncorrelated variables.
Applied to the flux distribution of our population we gain information about the effective
dimensionality of the resulting (discrete) hypersurface. That is, some fluxes will take specific values as we argued previously in the context of schemata in Sect. 3.3, while others
remain arbitrarily distributed over some range of flux values [−L, L]. PCA organizes the
full flux space into orthogonal dimensions of decreasing variance. The intuition is that most
data actually lives on a hyperplane of smaller dimension than the naive dimensionality of
the data set. This can be quantified by examining the percentage of the data’s variance
that is retained when the data is projected onto a particular hyperplane.
One subtlety is that our gauge-fixing condition forces different flux components to
take values in ranges of different scales. Naive application of PCA would then artificially
inflate the importance of fluxes taking values in a large range. To remove this artifact,
we first rescale the flux components in the initial population so that each component has
zero mean and unit variance. The same scaling transformation is then applied to the final
transformation.
For the final population obtained in Sect. 4.3 and Sect. 4.4, we find that the fluxes
live on an effectively 1-dimensional hypersurface, with 92.84% (no crossover) and 89.57%
(2-point crossover) of the variance in the first component. Similarly, binary encoding leads
to significantly more clustering with 99.63% (no crossover) and 92.96% (2-point crossover)
variance in the first component. Qualitatively, both crossover procedures give rise to a very
similar evolution of the variance.
4.6

Comparison to a Metropolis algorithm

In this section, we compare the results of our genetic algorithm to those of random walk
approaches. More specifically, we consider a Metropolis algorithm [111] or rather its related
variant of simulated annealing [112]. As before, we start with a randomly sampled generation of flux vacua. In contrast to the GA, we take a random step from each point in
8

The precise value of a minimal population size does not matter in our simple models. However,
for applications with more degrees of freedom the advantage of a reduced minimal p from binary
encoding can be substantial. For our purposes, this way of encoding crossovers gives similar results.

– 18 –

Figure 6: The distribution for gs and W0 obtained from a Metropolis algorithm.
flux space until we find a new solution to the F-term equations with small enough tadpole.
Explicitly, if N ∈ Z8 is some chromosome in our population, then a new flux M ∈ Z8 is
chosen as
M = N + rq
(4.9)
where q ∈ Z8 , |qi | ≤ 1, is a random vector and r ∈ N some fixed step size. The vector
q must be chosen such that M also leads to a solution of the F-term constraints with
Nflux (M) ≤ Lmax . Practically, this means that we have to perform many such steps and
test the criteria for a viable physical flux choice.
In order to define a new population, we evaluate an energy functional E given by the
difference in fitness
E = F (N) − F (M) .
(4.10)
If E ≤ 0, the new configuration M is energetically favorable. In this case, M is carried over
to the new population. If E > 0, we define a probability
PT (E) = e−E/T

(4.11)

with some “temperature” T and draw a random number q ∈ [0, 1]. If q < PT (E), M is
chosen as a member of the next generation.
Again, we use the same initial flux choices and let the algorithm run for 1000 steps for
each individual. We choose r = 1 and determine the initial temperature T for each vacuum
solution individually. That is, we fix an initial acceptance rate of about 20% by considering
100 random steps q before starting the evolution. We decrease the temperature by a factor
of 10 every 100 steps. In total, we find that 96% of individuals can be found within the
range [W0∗ − 50, W0∗ + 50]. If we compare the overall evolution of the distribution of gs and

– 19 –

Figure 7: The persistence diagram for the final population obtained with the Metropolis
algorithm. There is significantly more large scale structure to be observed than in the
analogous plot on the bottom of Fig. 4.
W0 in Fig. 6 with the one for the GA in Fig. 3, it becomes clear that this method, with
each individual walking independently of the others, does not exploit correlations between
different vacua. Although the population gets close to the optimal solution, it shows less
structure than the equivalent plots in Fig. 3. Similarly, we checked that the distribution
of φ-VEVs does not exhibit the symmetric pattern of Fig. 3. Qualitatively, this can be
understood as follows. After some generations within a GA, all vacua are in a sense related
to each other due to the applied selection process. On the contrary, the random walk
approach does not link solutions in a similar fashion. Thus, there is no reason for them to
share characteristics, albeit the population gathers around the optimal value W0∗ .
Since the final population is randomly distributed around the optimal solution, there
should be less clustering in flux space. By this reasoning, we should expect the distribution
of fluxes in the final distribution to have a much richer structure than for a GA. This can
be seen by comparing the persistence diagrams. Recall that in Fig. 4 we observed that the
final population resembles a cluster in flux space. In contrast, the persistence diagram of
the final population associated to the Metropolis algorithm in Fig. 7 exhibits more longlived higher-dimensional features. That is, there are a greater number of long-lived 1- and
2-cycles.
As before, we performed PCA on the flux distribution. Here, the variance in the first
component increases to only 54.6% in contrast to & 89% for the previous algorithms. That
is, the final population obtained via the Metropolis algorithm is less constrained in flux
space. This is to be expected from dynamics of the algorithm and already confirmed via
TDA.
Finally, we note that in our experiments, Metropolis was less efficient than GAs in
two senses. First, the random steps taken by Metropolis were less efficient in finding
physical vacua than our GA. As previously argued, crossover should be more efficient in
finding physical vacua than taking random steps. Second, even in terms of physical steps,

– 20 –

Metropolis took longer than our GAs. We found that it took Metropolis an average of 336
physical steps to match the performance of a GA after 80 generations.

5

Symmetric T 6

In this section we consider compactifications on a symmetric T 6 . One interesting feature of
the symmetric T 6 is the existence of vacua with vanishing tree-level superpotential. These
special vacua give rise to the opportunity to study their emergence within GAs. A major
issue with finding such vacua is that they are quite scarce in comparison to generic vacua.
Hence, we cannot take for granted that GAs can identify these exceptional cases within the
landscape.
5.1

Generic and special vacua

We follow the conventions of [81]. The symmetric torus can be viewed as a direct product
of three T 2 setting the modular parameters τ ≡ τ1 = τ2 = τ3 all equal. The moduli space
has two complex dimensions, so we have upon gauge fixing 8 independent flux parameters.
Let us first parametrize a general T 6 before we specialize to the symmetric case further
below. We define coordinates xi , y i for i = 1, 2, 3 with periodicity xi ≡ xi + 1, y i ≡ y i + 1
such that the three holomorphic 1-forms can be written as dz i = dxi + τ ij dy j . We take
the orientation
Z
dx1 ∧ dx2 ∧ dx3 ∧ dy 1 ∧ dy 2 ∧ dy 3 = 1
(5.1)
and choose a symplectic basis for H 3 (T 6 , Z), namely
α0 = dx1 ∧ dx2 ∧ dx3 ,

1
αij = ilm dxl ∧ dxm ∧ dy j ,
2

1
β ij = − jlm dy l ∧ dy m ∧ dxi ,
2

β 0 = dy 1 ∧ dy 2 ∧ dy 3 .

(5.2)

The holomorphic 3-form can be written as
Ω = dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz 3 .

(5.3)

We can expand the 3-form fluxes in terms of the symplectic basis (5.2)
F3 = a0 α0 + aij αij + bij β ij + b0 β 0
H3 = c0 α0 + cij αij + dij β ij + d0 β 0 .

(5.4)

For a symmetric T 6 , we take
τ ij = τ δ ij .

(5.5)

This is equivalent to taking the T 6 to be factorizable as three two-tori with equal modular
parameter. Similarly, the fluxes get reduced to
aij = aδ ij ,

bij = bδij ,

cij = cδ ij ,

– 21 –

dij = dδij .

(5.6)

The superpotential takes the simple form
W = P1 (τ ) − φP2 (τ )

(5.7)

where Pi are cubic polynomials in τ , i.e.,
P1 (τ ) = a0 τ 3 − 3aτ 2 − 3bτ − b0 ,

(5.8)

P2 (τ ) = c0 τ 3 − 3cτ 2 − 3dτ − d0 .

(5.9)

The Kähler potential for τ and φ reads
K = −3 log(−i(τ − τ )) − log(−i(φ − φ))

(5.10)

and the D3-brane charge induced by fluxes corresponds to
Nflux = b0 c0 − a0 d0 + 3(bc − ad) .

(5.11)

The F-term constraints can be written in the form
P1 (τ ) − φP2 (τ ) = 0 ,

(5.12)

P1 (τ ) − φP2 (τ ) = (τ − τ )(P10 (τ ) − φP20 (τ ))

(5.13)

For non-zero VEV of the superpotential W0 6= 0, the axio-dilaton can be obtained using
(5.12) so that
P1 (τ )
φ=
.
(5.14)
P2 (τ )
Plugged into (5.13), one finds for τ = x + iy
q1 (x)y 2 = q3 (x) ,
4

q0 (x)y = q4 (x) .

(5.15)
(5.16)

The qi are polynomials in x which have for instance been computed in the appendix of [81].
Surprisingly, multiplying both (5.15) and (5.16) to eliminate y, a cubic (rather than sextic)
equation in x remains so that x can be found by solving
α3 x3 + α2 x2 + α1 x + α0 = 0 .

(5.17)

The coefficients αi are combinations of flux integers and can again be found in [81].
Solutions with W0 = 0 satisfy
P1 (τ ) = P2 (τ ) = 0 .

(5.18)

Thus, the solution for φ simply reads
φ=

P10 (τ )
.
P20 (τ )

(5.19)

As shown in [113], these solutions obey the special property that P1 and P2 must factorize
over the integers, cf. Sect. 4.3.3 in [81]. Recently, it was shown in [25] using persistent
homology that the solutions with W0 = 0, when combined with flux quantization and
tadpole cancellation, exhibit a different structure in the moduli space than generic vacua.
We will see in Sect. 5.3 that this also plays an important role when applying GAs to
minimizing W0 .

– 22 –

5.2

Searching for gs – Emergence of multiple schemata

In this section, we discuss the emergence of various correlations and schemata within the
GA’s evolution. For the sake of simplicity, let us first look for solutions with a certain value
of gs . We begin with the following choice of parameters
gs∗ = 0.3 ,

δgs = 0.05 ,

p = 10000 ,

Ngen = 100 ,

Lmax = 500 ,

qmut = 1 .

(5.20)

We use a Gaussian to define the fitness, but e.g. a combination of Heaviside-functions
works equally well. After half of the generations, we divide δgs by a factor of 2 every 10
generations. We employ no crossover within this search since it appears to be more efficient
than employing a 2-point crossover operator.
Using the algorithm described in Sect. 3.2, we find an evolution of the initial population
as depicted in Figs. 8 and 9. Even though we only promoted gs to be a search parameter,
y = Im(τ ) also accumulates around a value of approximately given by y ≈ 10.68, cf. the
bottom plot of Fig. 8. As described in the introduction, this is a generic observation for
GAs during which the evolution exerts a strong pull on some components of the moduli. In
contrast, the values of Re(φ) and Re(τ ) remain equally scattered across the fundamental
domain. Remarkably, we detect a correlation between gs and W0 , see Fig. 9. For small
values of W0 , the value of gs is almost perfectly pinned to gs∗ , whereas the solutions tend to
diverge away from gs∗ for large W0 . This clearly raises the question whether we can improve
on our findings by simultaneously minimizing W0 .
To quantify convergence, we count the number of members within neighborhoods of
different sizes. The progress of convergence from one generation to another is shown in
Fig. 10. We observe that decreasing δgs after generation 50 clearly pushes the population
closer to gs∗ . Moreover, around 90% of the population can be found within the interval
[gs∗ − 0.1, gs∗ + 0.1] after only 10 generations.
As discussed in Sect. 3.3, the initial population evolves rapidly towards a region close
to the optimal solution. The drop in blue and orange line observed in Fig. 10 is associated
to the fact that the population gathers around two local fitness maxima. However, the
algorithm picks out a global maximum over the course of a few generations. This can also
be understood by looking at the distribution of certain fluxes forming the schemata. For
simplicity, we only look at one dominating flux. Fig. 11 shows that there are two dominating
peaks in the distribution of the flux number b at generation 10 (left), recall Eq. (5.6). Once
the dominating schema wins, the population is pulled towards the peak on the right as
depicted on the right hand side of Fig. 11. This can also be supported by considering the
distribution of vacua in the W0 -gs -plane as shown in Fig. 12. Notice that briefly the total
number of members in the 1σ-region decreases, cf. Fig. 10. It is therefore important to
keep in mind that the purpose of the algorithm is not to find as many suitable members as
possible, but to maximize the fitness function.
Finally, let us comment on the distribution of fluxes. By performing PCA on the fluxes
we observe that there are essentially only two free unconstrained directions in flux space,
namely b0 and d0 . The evolution of the corresponding distribution is shown in Fig. 13. We
observe a triangular shape with two dominating horizontal lines for fixed d0 . All in all, we

– 23 –

Figure 8: Evolution of the distribution of φ (top) and τ (bottom) for three generations.
find that for about 80% of the population
a0 = 1 ,

b0 ∈ [−250, 250] ,

a ∈ [−1, 1] ,
5.3

c0 = 0 ,

b ∈ [−36, −33] ,

d0 ∈ [370, 390] ,

c = −1 ,

d ∈ [−3, 3] .

(5.21)

Minimizing W0

Here, we try to find solutions with W0 = 0. As discussed previously, these solutions have
special properties in terms of the fluxes and VEVs. Notice that we do not implement

– 24 –

Figure 9: Evolution of the distribution of gs and W0 for three generations.

Figure 10: Number of members in neighborhoods of different radius around gs∗ .
these analytic properties by hand, but simply look for solutions with P1 (τ ) = P2 (τ ) = 0
for τ and physical VEVs. So the algorithm does not know in advance about these special
characteristic features associated to W0 = 0 solutions. We would like to understand whether
this has any impact on our genetic algorithm. We consider the parameters
W0∗ = 0 ,

δW = 20 ,

p = 10000 ,

Ngen = 180 ,

Lmax = 500 ,

qmut = 0.8 .

(5.22)

We decrease the support of the fitness function by 50% at generation 50, 70 and 90.
As shown in Fig. 14, the populations quickly converge towards small values of W0 .

– 25 –

Figure 11: The distribution of b for generation 10 (left) and 30 (right).

Figure 12: The distribution of vacua in the W0 -gs -plane for generation 10 (left) and 30
(right).
However, the rate of convergence is significantly less than in e.g. Fig. 10. This becomes
even more apparent when investigating the FDC of this task. Indeed, the evolution of
the FDC in Fig. 15 shows that, while minimizing itself is not problematic at all, finding
W0 < 2.5 is GA-difficult. For one thing, the lack in convergence is related to the scarcity
of W0 = 0-solutions in comparison to those with W0 6= 0. As derived in [81], the number
Nvac (L, W0 = 0) of W0 = 0-solutions for given flux scale L ≤ Lmax
Nvac (L, W0 = 0)
9 log(L)
∼ 2
Nvac (L)
8π
L

(5.23)

in terms of the total number of vacua Nvac (L). On top of that, at small L discretization
effects overshadow W0 = 0 solutions (see for example Fig. 3 in [81]) which is why we have
to go to comparatively large L. In any case, we observe that special solutions with W0 = 0
are difficult for our algorithm to identify. Notwithstanding, we note that a small fraction
of individuals do satisfy W0 = 0.
In the light of the ongoing discussion about KKLT and related dS-vacua constructions
[114, 115], it is crucial to search the landscape for suitable flux vacua, see e.g. [99, 116]
for previous attempts. In order to safely ignore perturbative corrections, it is necessary to
have W0  1 [101, 117]. One can infer the existence of such vacua by employing statistical

– 26 –

Figure 13: Flux distribution for the two (almost) unconstrained fluxes b0 , d0 in the final
population.
arguments [8]. However, it is generally true that these vacua are less common than those
with W0 & O(1) using similar arguments to the one above [10].
In our case, the smallest value found via the above algorithm is W0 ∼ 10−2 . Here it is
important to keep in mind that the symmetric T 6 is only a simple toy example. General
Calabi-Yau orientifolds with many moduli are expected to have a more involved structure
within their flux landscape. Therefore, it would be interesting to see whether smaller values
of W0 are obtainable within such geometries utilizing GAs and extensions thereof.
5.4

Fixing mass scales

To conclude our survey of applications, we investigate a more difficult problem in the
context of GAs. Namely, we elaborate on the idea of specifying several observables within
our search. As we will see further below, it is necessary to try different selection methods
in order to guarantee the success of our GA. We restrict our analysis to the case of no
crossover which allows us to study the impact of different selection methods more easily.
The question of finding flux configurations with certain values of the mass scales is
ubiquitous in the context of model building in string theory. For simplicity, we compute
the diagonal entries of the mass matrix (2.8) for the canonically normalized fields evaluated
at the SUSY minimum Dφ W = Dτ W = 0 which we denote MRe(φ) etc. We fix all four
masses at the same value, i.e., we consider
M ∗ = 5000 ,

δM = 1000 ,

p = 10000 ,

– 27 –

Ngen = 120 ,

qmut = 1 .

(5.24)

Figure 14: Top: the number of members in neighborhoods of different radius around W0∗ .
Bottom: the evolution of the distribution of gs and W0 for four generations.
We determined the associated weights and the offset in (3.2) by trial and error, giving
wRe(φ) = 6.8 ,

wIm(φ) = 1.0 ,

wRe(τ ) = 1.3 ,

wIm(τ ) = 0.4 ,

b = 0.

(5.25)

We decrease δM only once at generation 60.
Figure 16 summarizes the results obtained by running the GA. The left plot shows that
certain quantities are treated differently from the others during the algorithm’s evolution.
The right hand side of Fig. 16 depicts the number of individuals that satisfy the search
criteria for all four mass scales at the same time. In comparison to the results obtained in
the previous section, we conclude that it is significantly harder to get closer to the optimal
solution whenever several parameters are taken into account. However, this might simply

– 28 –

Figure 15: Fitness distance correlation as a function of generation.

Figure 16: Top: the number of individuals having a single mass matrix entry within a
neighborhood of r = 500. Bottom: the number of individuals having all four masses within
neighborhoods of different radii.
be related to a bad choice of selection methods. As mentioned previously, many of such
methods have been discussed in the literature, but we restricted mainly to the so-called
roulette-wheel selection so far where the fitness itself is used as a measure of probability to
procreate. This typically leads to premature convergence towards a local fitness maximum.

– 29 –

Figure 17: Top: the number of individuals having a single mass matrix entry within a
neighborhood of r = 500 using tournament selection. Bottom: the number of individuals
having all four masses within different neighborhoods.
This is not really problematic in the case of one GA-parameter. In the context of several,
however, this is a serious issue.
Therefore, we tested different selection techniques such as
• rank-weighted selection where each member is ranked by a number 1, . . . , p according
to its fitness. This ranking is used to determine the probability for procreation which
is chosen to be a linear mapping here. In comparison to roulette-wheel selection this
means that individuals with high fitness do not dominate the crossover procedure too
early during evolution.
• tournament selection where so-called tournaments between a subset of members are
performed. That is, we pick k < p individuals from our population and take only
the fittest for breeding. Since we need to make several of such tournaments, the
diversity of fit individuals in the descendant population is enhanced. In other words,
the population does not localize too early around a local fitness maximum.
The first does not lead to any better results, but is significantly slower in terms of convergence around the optimal solution. In contrast, tournament selection is really efficient in

– 30 –

determining a global fitness maximum that satisfies the constraints on all search parameters.
Starting with the same initial population as above, we use the parameters
wRe(φ) = wIm(φ) = wRe(τ ) = wIm(τ ) = 1.0 ,

b=0

(5.26)

and consider only Ngen = 60 generations. The results for tournament selection are summarized in Fig. 17. A crucial advantage of using tournament selection is that one can
achieve significantly better results compared to Fig. 16 with only half the number of generations. Even though performing several tournaments is computationally more expensive,
this selection method is therefore more efficient in the scenario under consideration.
Finally, we would like to discuss tasks that are hard to tackle with GAs. In the context
of this section, we observed some difficulty trying to arrange mass hierarchies. We believe
that this is related to the more general circumstance that, whenever observables are strongly
correlated, it is hard to fix them simultaneously. In the worst case, certain parameter values
might be incompatible with each other, in the sense that no such pair exists in the fitness
landscape. Alternatively, such solutions are very scarce. Identifying these limitations is
typically beyond the GA’s (or any stochastic search algorithm’s) capabilities.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we demonstrated that genetic algorithms are a helpful tool for searching for
specific phenomenological features in the landscape of flux vacua. This is possible due to the
underlying structure of the landscape, which is crucial for the success of GAs. We showed
that GAs may be used not only to speed up the search for phenomenologically interesting
models, but also to uncover unknown structures and correlations in the landscape.
In the present work, we discussed various properties of GAs that allow for a systematic
and efficient study of the flux landscape. Specifically, we proposed a dictionary between
concepts in these two respective fields that could be useful for future applications of GAs
to string theory.
Applying our dictionary, we first considered the example of a Calabi-Yau hypersurface
in a weighted projective space close to a conifold point. We observed the important effect
the mutation rate has on the algorithm’s performance, and the need to adjust it for various
applications. We also studied the general dynamics of the GA, with an initial period of
strong pull towards a local optimum followed by slower convergence to the global optimum.
Along these lines, we used TDA and PCA to study the “shape” of the distribution of
fluxes as a function of generation. These methods confirmed our ideas regarding clustering
in the final population. We showed that distinct crossover operations typically lead to
different evolutionary properties of the GA, albeit the final population turns out to be
almost equivalent. In addition, we compared various breeding mechanisms which could
be useful in scaled-up versions of the models investigated in this paper. In contrast to
a Metropolis algorithm, the GA identifies links between various vacua due to the applied
crossover procedure, enabling it to exploit the landscape’s structure. On the other hand, a
Metropolis algorithm features no such benefits.

– 31 –

We also applied the GA to a symmetric T 6 . While searches for values of the string
coupling are GA-easy, we showed that finding solutions satisfying W0 = 0 is difficult in
the context of GAs. Although these solutions emerged within our searches, their scarcity
seems to counteract the formation of associated schemata. This behavior can be quantified
in terms of the fitness distance correlation. Finally and most importantly, we demonstrated that GAs are capable of finding vacua with several properties, namely specifying
several masses. This success is encouraging as we look towards phenomenologically-viable
constructions.
We emphasize that the applications of GAs are diverse and can easily be translated
into other promising setups of, e.g., model building in string theory. In the future, we
would like to turn to phenomenologically interesting questions such as testing the WGC or
other statements about the landscape. We would also like to investigate different selection
methods and other GA-relevant techniques allowing for an improved version of the algorithm
applied in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We thank Arthur Hebecker and Pablo Soler for discussion. This work is supported in
part by the DOE grant DE-SC0017647 and the Kellett Award of the University of Wisconsin.
AC would like to thank the Straka Fund at UW-Madison for financial support. GS would
like to thank the Aspen Center for Physics for hospitality during the final stages of this
work. AS acknowledges support by the German Academic Scholarship Foundation and the
hospitality of the University of Wisconsin during part of this work.

References
[1] R. Bousso and J. Polchinski, Quantization of four form fluxes and dynamical neutralization
of the cosmological constant, JHEP 06 (2000) 006 [hep-th/0004134].
[2] L. Susskind, The Anthropic landscape of string theory, hep-th/0302219.
[3] M. R. Douglas, The Statistics of string / M theory vacua, JHEP 05 (2003) 046
[hep-th/0303194].
[4] T. Banks, M. Dine and E. Gorbatov, Is there a string theory landscape?, JHEP 08 (2004)
058 [hep-th/0309170].
[5] T. Banks, Landskepticism or why effective potentials don’t count string models, 2004,
hep-th/0412129.
[6] T. Banks, The Top 10500 Reasons Not to Believe in the Landscape, 1208.5715.
[7] S. Ashok and M. R. Douglas, Counting flux vacua, JHEP 01 (2004) 060 [hep-th/0307049].
[8] F. Denef and M. R. Douglas, Distributions of flux vacua, JHEP 05 (2004) 072
[hep-th/0404116].
[9] M. R. Douglas, B. Shiffman and S. Zelditch, Critical points and supersymmetric vacua,
Commun. Math. Phys. 252 (2004) 325 [math/0402326].
[10] F. Denef and M. R. Douglas, Distributions of nonsupersymmetric flux vacua, JHEP 03
(2005) 061 [hep-th/0411183].
[11] L. Susskind, Supersymmetry breaking in the anthropic landscape, hep-th/0405189.

– 32 –

[12] M. R. Douglas, Statistical analysis of the supersymmetry breaking scale, hep-th/0405279.
[13] M. Dine, E. Gorbatov and S. D. Thomas, Low energy supersymmetry from the landscape,
JHEP 08 (2008) 098 [hep-th/0407043].
[14] J. P. Conlon and F. Quevedo, On the explicit construction and statistics of Calabi-Yau flux
vacua, JHEP 10 (2004) 039 [hep-th/0409215].
[15] R. Kallosh and A. D. Linde, Landscape, the scale of SUSY breaking, and inflation, JHEP
12 (2004) 004 [hep-th/0411011].
[16] F. Marchesano, G. Shiu and L.-T. Wang, Model building and phenomenology of flux-induced
supersymmetry breaking on D3-branes, Nucl. Phys. B712 (2005) 20 [hep-th/0411080].
[17] M. Dine, D. O’Neil and Z. Sun, Branches of the landscape, JHEP 07 (2005) 014
[hep-th/0501214].
[18] B. S. Acharya, F. Denef and R. Valandro, Statistics of M theory vacua, JHEP 06 (2005)
056 [hep-th/0502060].
[19] K. R. Dienes, Statistics on the heterotic landscape: Gauge groups and cosmological constants
of four-dimensional heterotic strings, Phys. Rev. D73 (2006) 106010 [hep-th/0602286].
[20] F. Gmeiner, R. Blumenhagen, G. Honecker, D. Lust and T. Weigand, One in a billion:
MSSM-like D-brane statistics, JHEP 01 (2006) 004 [hep-th/0510170].
[21] M. R. Douglas and W. Taylor, The Landscape of intersecting brane models, JHEP 01
(2007) 031 [hep-th/0606109].
[22] C. Vafa, The String landscape and the swampland, hep-th/0509212.
[23] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, On the Geometry of the String Landscape and the Swampland, Nucl.
Phys. B766 (2007) 21 [hep-th/0605264].
[24] E. Palti, The Swampland: Introduction and Review, Fortsch. Phys. 67 (2019) 1900037
[1903.06239].
[25] A. Cole and G. Shiu, Topological Data Analysis for the String Landscape, JHEP 03 (2019)
054 [1812.06960].
[26] Y.-H. He, Deep-Learning the Landscape, 1706.02714.
[27] D. Krefl and R.-K. Seong, Machine Learning of Calabi-Yau Volumes, Phys. Rev. D96
(2017) 066014 [1706.03346].
[28] F. Ruehle, Evolving neural networks with genetic algorithms to study the String Landscape,
JHEP 08 (2017) 038 [1706.07024].
[29] J. Carifio, J. Halverson, D. Krioukov and B. D. Nelson, Machine Learning in the String
Landscape, JHEP 09 (2017) 157 [1707.00655].
[30] Y.-N. Wang and Z. Zhang, Learning non-Higgsable gauge groups in 4D F-theory, JHEP 08
(2018) 009 [1804.07296].
[31] K. Bull, Y.-H. He, V. Jejjala and C. Mishra, Machine Learning CICY Threefolds, Phys.
Lett. B785 (2018) 65 [1806.03121].
[32] D. Klaewer and L. Schlechter, Machine Learning Line Bundle Cohomologies of
Hypersurfaces in Toric Varieties, Phys. Lett. B789 (2019) 438 [1809.02547].

– 33 –

[33] A. MÃĳtter, E. Parr and P. K. S. Vaudrevange, Deep learning in the heterotic orbifold
landscape, Nucl. Phys. B940 (2019) 113 [1811.05993].
[34] J. Halverson, B. Nelson and F. Ruehle, Branes with Brains: Exploring String Vacua with
Deep Reinforcement Learning, 1903.11616.
[35] Y.-H. He and S.-J. Lee, Distinguishing Elliptic Fibrations with AI, 1904.08530.
[36] J. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. The MIT Press reprinted, 1992.
[37] E. David, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning.
Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[38] J. Holland, The Royal Road for Genetic Algorithms: Fitness Landscapes and GA
Performance. MIT Press, 1992.
[39] C. Reeves and J. Rowe, Genetic Algorithms: Principles and Perspectives. Springer, 2002.
[40] R. Haupt, Practical genetic algorithms. Wyley, 2004.
[41] D. Michalewicz, How to Solve It: Modern Heuristics. Springer, 2004.
[42] B. C. Allanach, D. Grellscheid and F. Quevedo, Genetic algorithms and experimental
discrimination of SUSY models, JHEP 07 (2004) 069 [hep-ph/0406277].
[43] Y. Akrami, P. Scott, J. Edsjo, J. Conrad and L. Bergstrom, A Profile Likelihood Analysis of
the Constrained MSSM with Genetic Algorithms, JHEP 04 (2010) 057 [0910.3950].
[44] S. Abel, D. G. CerdeÃśo and S. Robles, The Power of Genetic Algorithms: what remains of
the pMSSM?, 1805.03615.
[45] T. S. Metcalfe, R. E. Nather and D. E. Winget, Genetic-algorithm-based asteroseismological
analysis of the dbv white dwarf gd 358, Astrophys. J. 545 (2000) 974 [astro-ph/0008022].
[46] M. R. Mokiem, A. de Koter, J. Puls, A. Herrero, F. Najarro and M. R. Villamariz, Spectral
analysis of early-type stars using a genetic algorithm based fitting method, Astron.
Astrophys. 441 (2005) 711 [astro-ph/0506751].
[47] V. Rajpaul, Genetic algorithms in astronomy and astrophysics, in Proceedings, 56th Annuall
Conference of the South African Institute of Physics (SAIP 2011): Gauteng, South Africa,
July 12-15, 2011, pp. 519–524, 2012, 1202.1643.
[48] S. Nesseris and J. Garcia-Bellido, A new perspective on Dark Energy modeling via Genetic
Algorithms, JCAP 1211 (2012) 033 [1205.0364].
[49] R. Hogan, M. Fairbairn and N. Seeburn, GAz: A Genetic Algorithm for Photometric
Redshift Estimation, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 449 (2015) 2040 [1412.5997].
[50] J. Blabäck, U. Danielsson and G. Dibitetto, Fully stable dS vacua from generalised fluxes,
JHEP 08 (2013) 054 [1301.7073].
[51] C. Damian, L. R. Diaz-Barron, O. Loaiza-Brito and M. Sabido, Slow-Roll Inflation in
Non-geometric Flux Compactification, JHEP 06 (2013) 109 [1302.0529].
[52] C. Damian and O. Loaiza-Brito, More stable de Sitter vacua from S-dual nongeometric
fluxes, Phys. Rev. D88 (2013) 046008 [1304.0792].
[53] J. Blabäck, U. Danielsson and G. Dibitetto, Accelerated Universes from type IIA
Compactifications, JCAP 1403 (2014) 003 [1310.8300].

– 34 –

[54] J. BlÃěbÃďck, D. Roest and I. Zavala, De Sitter Vacua from Nonperturbative Flux
Compactifications, Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) 024065 [1312.5328].
[55] S. Abel and J. Rizos, Genetic Algorithms and the Search for Viable String Vacua, JHEP 08
(2014) 010 [1404.7359].
[56] F. Denef and M. R. Douglas, Computational complexity of the landscape. I., Annals Phys.
322 (2007) 1096 [hep-th/0602072].
[57] N. Bao, R. Bousso, S. Jordan and B. Lackey, Fast optimization algorithms and the
cosmological constant, Phys. Rev. D96 (2017) 103512 [1706.08503].
[58] F. Denef, M. R. Douglas, B. Greene and C. Zukowski, Computational complexity of the
landscape IIâĂŤCosmological considerations, Annals Phys. 392 (2018) 93 [1706.06430].
[59] J. Halverson and F. Ruehle, Computational Complexity of Vacua and Near-Vacua in Field
and String Theory, Phys. Rev. D99 (2019) 046015 [1809.08279].
[60] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van Den Driessche et al.,
Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search, nature 529 (2016) 484.
[61] T. Salimans, J. Ho, X. Chen, S. Sidor and I. Sutskever, Evolution Strategies as a Scalable
Alternative to Reinforcement Learning, arXiv e-prints (2017) arXiv:1703.03864
[1703.03864].
[62] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis and C. Vafa, The String landscape, black holes and
gravity as the weakest force, JHEP 06 (2007) 060 [hep-th/0601001].
[63] J. Brown, W. Cottrell, G. Shiu and P. Soler, Fencing in the Swampland: Quantum Gravity
Constraints on Large Field Inflation, JHEP 10 (2015) 023 [1503.04783].
[64] J. Brown, W. Cottrell, G. Shiu and P. Soler, On Axionic Field Ranges, Loopholes and the
Weak Gravity Conjecture, JHEP 04 (2016) 017 [1504.00659].
[65] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece and T. Rudelius, Sharpening the Weak Gravity Conjecture with
Dimensional Reduction, JHEP 02 (2016) 140 [1509.06374].
[66] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece and T. Rudelius, Evidence for a sublattice weak gravity conjecture,
JHEP 08 (2017) 025 [1606.08437].
[67] M. Montero, G. Shiu and P. Soler, The Weak Gravity Conjecture in three dimensions,
JHEP 10 (2016) 159 [1606.08438].
[68] S. Andriolo, D. Junghans, T. Noumi and G. Shiu, A Tower Weak Gravity Conjecture from
Infrared Consistency, Fortsch. Phys. 66 (2018) 1800020 [1802.04287].
[69] P. Charbonneau, Genetic Algorithms in Astronomy and Astrophysics, ApJS 101 (1995) 309.
[70] P. Charbonneau and B. Knapp, A user’s guide to pikaia 1.0, Tech. Rep. TN-418+IA,
National Center for Atmospheric Research (1995) .
[71] P. Charbonneau, An introduction to genetic algorithms for numerical optimization, NCAR
Technical Note (2002) 74.
[72] P. Charbonneau, Release notes for pikaia 1.2, Tech. Rep. TN-451+STR, National Center
for Atmospheric Research (2002) .
[73] T. Jones and S. Forrest, Fitness distance correlation as a measure of problem didculty for
genetic algorithms, in Proc. 6th Internat. Conf. on Genetic Algorithms, 1995.

– 35 –

[74] P. Collard, A. Gaspar, M. Clergue and C. Escazut, Fitness distance correlation, as statistical
measure of genetic algorithm difficulty, revisited., in ECAI, pp. 650–654, Citeseer, 1998.
[75] J. D. Bryngelson, J. N. Onuchic, N. D. Socci and P. G. Wolynes, Funnels, pathways, and
the energy landscape of protein folding: a synthesis, Proteins: Structure, Function, and
Bioinformatics 21 (1995) 167.
[76] J. Khoury and O. Parrikar, Search Optimization, Funnel Topography, and Dynamical
Criticality on the String Landscape, 1907.07693.
[77] W. Ruml, J. T. Ngo, J. Marks and S. M. Shieber, Easily searched encodings for number
partitioning, Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications 89 (1996) 251.
[78] M. Grana, Flux compactifications in string theory: A Comprehensive review, Phys. Rept.
423 (2006) 91 [hep-th/0509003].
[79] M. R. Douglas and S. Kachru, Flux compactification, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79 (2007) 733
[hep-th/0610102].
[80] S. B. Giddings, S. Kachru and J. Polchinski, Hierarchies from fluxes in string
compactifications, Phys. Rev. D66 (2002) 106006 [hep-th/0105097].
[81] O. DeWolfe, A. Giryavets, S. Kachru and W. Taylor, Enumerating flux vacua with enhanced
symmetries, JHEP 02 (2005) 037 [hep-th/0411061].
[82] S. Gukov, C. Vafa and E. Witten, CFT’s from Calabi-Yau four folds, Nucl. Phys. B584
(2000) 69 [hep-th/9906070].
[83] J. E. Baker, Reducing bias and inefficiency in the selection algorithm, in Proceedings of the
second international conference on genetic algorithms, vol. 206, pp. 14–21, 1987.
[84] D. E. Goldberg, Genetic algorithms in search, Optimization, and MachineLearning (1989) .
[85] L. D. Whitley et al., The genitor algorithm and selection pressure: why rank-based
allocation of reproductive trials is best., in Icga, vol. 89, pp. 116–123, Fairfax, VA, 1989.
[86] E. Saliby, Descriptive sampling: a better approach to monte carlo simulation, Journal of the
Operational Research Society 41 (1990) 1133.
[87] D. E. Goldberg and K. Deb, A comparative analysis of selection schemes used in genetic
algorithms, in Foundations of genetic algorithms, vol. 1, pp. 69–93, Elsevier, (1991).
[88] H. Miihlenbein and D. Schlierkamp-Voosen, The science of breeding and its application to
the breeder genetic algorithm, Evolutionary Computation 1 (1994) 335.
[89] P. J. Hancock, An empirical comparison of selection methods in evolutionary algorithms, in
AISB Workshop on Evolutionary Computing, pp. 80–94, Springer, 1994.
[90] P. J. Hancock, Selection methods for evolutionary algorithms, Practical Handbook of
Genetic Algorithms 2 (1995) 67.
[91] T. Blickle and L. Thiele, A comparison of selection schemes used in evolutionary
algorithms, Evolutionary Computation 4 (1996) 361.
[92] D. Thierens, Selection schemes, elitist recombination, and selection intensity, vol. 1998.
Utrecht University: Information and Computing Sciences, 1998.
[93] S. L. Lohr, Sampling: Design and analysis, 1999.

– 36 –

[94] G. Rudolph, Takeover times and probabilities of non-generational selection rules, in
Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation,
pp. 903–910, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2000.
[95] G. Rudolph, Takeover times of noisy non-generational selection rules that undo extinction,
in Artificial Neural Nets and Genetic Algorithms, pp. 268–271, Springer, 2001.
[96] C. Reeves and J. Rowe, Genetic Algorithms: Principles and Perspectives: A Guide to GA
Theory, vol. 20. Springer Science & Business Media, 2002.
[97] R. L. Haupt and S. Ellen Haupt, Practical genetic algorithms, .
[98] P. Betzler and E. Plauschinn, Type IIB flux vacua and tadpole cancellation, 1905.08823.
[99] A. Giryavets, S. Kachru, P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, Flux compactifications on
Calabi-Yau threefolds, JHEP 04 (2004) 003 [hep-th/0312104].
[100] A. Giryavets, S. Kachru and P. K. Tripathy, On the taxonomy of flux vacua, JHEP 08
(2004) 002 [hep-th/0404243].
[101] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. D. Linde and S. P. Trivedi, De Sitter vacua in string theory,
Phys. Rev. D68 (2003) 046005 [hep-th/0301240].
[102] V. Balasubramanian, P. Berglund, J. P. Conlon and F. Quevedo, Systematics of moduli
stabilisation in Calabi-Yau flux compactifications, JHEP 03 (2005) 007 [hep-th/0502058].
[103] A. Westphal, de Sitter string vacua from Kahler uplifting, JHEP 03 (2007) 102
[hep-th/0611332].
[104] M. Cirafici, Persistent Homology and String Vacua, JHEP 03 (2016) 045 [1512.01170].
[105] H. Edelsbrunner, D. Letscher and A. Zomorodian, Topological persistence and
simplification, in Proceedings 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
pp. 454–463, IEEE, 2000.
[106] A. Zomorodian and G. Carlsson, Computing persistent homology, Discrete & Computational
Geometry 33 (2005) 249.
[107] G. Carlsson, Topology and data, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 46 (2009)
255.
[108] G. Carlsson, Topological pattern recognition for point cloud data, Acta Numerica 23 (2014)
289.
[109] A. Cole and G. Shiu, Persistent Homology and Non-Gaussianity, JCAP 1803 (2018) 025
[1712.08159].
[110] J. Murugan and D. Robertson, An Introduction to Topological Data Analysis for Physicists:
From LGM to FRBs, 1904.11044.
[111] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller and E. Teller, Equation
of state calculations by fast computing machines, The Journal of Chemical Physics 21
(1953) 1087.
[112] S. Kirkpatrick, C. Gelatt and M. Vecchi, Simulated annealing methods, J. Stat. Phys 34
(1984) 975.
[113] S. Kachru, M. B. Schulz and S. Trivedi, Moduli stabilization from fluxes in a simple IIB
orientifold, JHEP 10 (2003) 007 [hep-th/0201028].

– 37 –

[114] G. Obied, H. Ooguri, L. Spodyneiko and C. Vafa, De Sitter Space and the Swampland,
1806.08362.
[115] H. Ooguri, E. Palti, G. Shiu and C. Vafa, Distance and de Sitter Conjectures on the
Swampland, Phys. Lett. B788 (2019) 180 [1810.05506].
[116] F. Denef, M. R. Douglas and B. Florea, Building a better racetrack, JHEP 06 (2004) 034
[hep-th/0404257].
[117] J. P. Conlon, F. Quevedo and K. Suruliz, Large-volume flux compactifications: Moduli
spectrum and D3/D7 soft supersymmetry breaking, JHEP 08 (2005) 007 [hep-th/0505076].

– 38 –

