ACFI-T22-10

Moduli Space Reconstruction
and Weak Gravity
or

arXiv:2212.10573v2 [hep-th] 27 Dec 2023

Unto the Ends of the Moduli Space
With Illustrations by the Authors

Naomi Gendler,a,b Ben Heidenreich,c Liam McAllister,a
Jakob Moritz,a,d and Tom Rudeliuse,f
a

Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
c
Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
d
Department of Theoretical Physics, CERN, 1211 Meyrin, Switzerland
e
Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
f
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
b

Abstract

We present a method to construct the extended Kähler cone of any Calabi-Yau threefold by using Gopakumar-Vafa invariants to identify all geometric phases that are related
by flops or Weyl reflections. In this way we obtain the Kähler moduli spaces of all favorable Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces with h1,1 ≤ 4, including toric and non-toric
phases. In this setting we perform an explicit test of the Weak Gravity Conjecture by
using the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants to count BPS states. All of our examples satisfy the
tower/sublattice WGC, and in fact they even satisfy the stronger lattice WGC.

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 Review of Calabi-Yau Compactifications
2.1 Effective theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Calabi-Yau geometry and BPS states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3
3
6

3 Moduli Space Reconstruction from GV Invariants
3.1 Facets of the Kähler cone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.1 Flop transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.2 Weyl reflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.3 Tensionless string CFTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.4 Asymptotic boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Moduli space from genus zero GV invariants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Geometric data from analytic continuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Assembly algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 An example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14
14
14
15
18
18
18
20
21
22

4 Checks of the Weak Gravity Conjecture
4.1 The lattice WGC for BPS states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Testing the lattice WGC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24
24
25

5 Conclusions

29

A Computational Algorithm

30

B Toric Technology and Notation

34

C Examples

35

1

1

Introduction

The physics resulting from a compactification of string theory often varies across a moduli
space of geometries. Characterizing the moduli space is then a prerequisite for understanding the imprint of quantum gravity on low-energy physics. In general the moduli space is
the union of a number of regions, for example corresponding to distinct geometric phases,
and a primary task is to map out the transitions among these components.
In this work we will consider the Kähler moduli space of birationally-equivalent CalabiYau threefolds. This moduli space is a cone, the extended Kähler cone K, whose dimension
is given by the Hodge number h1,1 of the threefold. The extended Kähler cone is the
union of a collection of smaller cones, each corresponding to the Kähler cone of a distinct
geometric phase, and linked to its neighbors by birational transformations: see Figure 1.
The number of phases grows rapidly as h1,1 increases, so much so that constructing K
becomes challenging for h1,1 > 2.
The first result of this paper is a general algorithm for constructing the extended Kähler
cone. We probe the Calabi-Yau via compactification of M-theory. Starting from one phase,
one needs to know which other phases to adjoin via flop transitions. We show how to use
the Gopakumar-Vafa (GV) invariants of curves to identify the set of curves that can be
flopped. In the process we also identify curves associated to su(2) enhancements, and we
show how to account for the gauge redundancy resulting from their Weyl reflections. We
then use the data of flops and Weyl reflections to map out the entire Kähler moduli space.1
In the case of Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces in toric varieties, one can compute the
GV invariants by means of mirror symmetry [2,3], for example using CYTools [4,5]. In this
setting we construct the Kähler moduli spaces of all favorable geometries with h1,1 ≤ 4,
and of a selection of geometries with h1,1 = 5.
The second result of this paper is an application of the first: we test the Weak Gravity
Conjecture (WGC) [6] in our ensemble of compactifications on Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces by reconstructing the Kähler moduli space in each case. The WGC predicts
that certain superextremal states should exist. In particular, in the region in charge space
where BPS black holes2 exist, denoted hereafter by CBH , the WGC predicts the existence
of BPS particles.3 The GV invariants are BPS indices, and so a sufficient — but not nec1

As explained in [1], the data of the extended Kähler cone also provides a means of studying the
complete effective cones in these geometries, but we defer this application to future work.
2
These black holes need not be spherically symmetric, and could in fact be multi-centered.
3
Specifically, the lattice WGC predicts the existence of a BPS particle for each site in the intersection
of the charge lattice with CBH ; the sublattice WGC predicts the existence of a BPS particle on a full-

2

essary — condition for the existence of a BPS particle of a given electric charge is that the
corresponding GV invariant is nonzero. Building on [1], we show how to compute a region
contained in CBH by carrying out all flops, as well as all Weyl reflections across which all
BPS states remain stable. Upon computing this region and the GV invariants of charges
therein, we find that the tower and sublattice WGC [7, 8], and even the stronger lattice
WGC [9], are obeyed in all our examples, out to the highest charges we examined. This
is somewhat surprising because there are known counterexamples to the lattice WGC [7],
which arise in certain toroidal compactifications of type II/heterotic string theory. It is
significant, perhaps, that no such counterexamples arise in the class of Calabi-Yau compactifications considered here.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In §2 we review some salient aspects of CalabiYau geometry. In §3 we explain the transitions that can occur when passing through a
wall in the Kähler moduli space. We show how to use the data of GV invariants to identify
curves that can be flopped, and thus connect birationally-equivalent Calabi-Yau threefolds.
We present an algorithm to assemble the extended Kähler cone by combining all possible
flops, unto the ends of the moduli space. In §4 we construct the extended Kähler cones of
an ensemble of Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces and use this knowledge to carry out a
large-scale test of the WGC. We conclude in §5.

2

Review of Calabi-Yau Compactifications

In this section we will briefly review a few results from compactifications of M-theory and
type IIA string theory on Calabi-Yau threefolds, focusing on the definitions and interrelations of a number of cones, and on their connections to Gopakumar-Vafa invariants.

2.1

Effective theory

We begin by compactifying M-theory on a Calabi-Yau threefold X. The result is a fivedimensional N = 1 effective supergravity theory. The massless particle spectrum is given
by the gravity multiplet, h2,1 (X)+1 hypermultiplets, and n := h1,1 (X)−1 vector multiplets.
The 4h2,1 (X) + 4 scalar degrees of freedom in the hypermultiplets are furnished by the
2h2,1 (X) complex structure moduli of X, the 2h2,1 + 3 axions from dimensional reduction
of the eleven-dimensional three-form, and the overall volume modulus of X, while the n
dimensional sublattice in CBH ; and the tower WGC predicts an infinite tower of BPS particles along each
rational ray in CBH .

3

scalars parameterizing the vector multiplet moduli space come from the Kähler moduli of
X that leave the overall volume fixed. At generic points in Kähler moduli space the gauge
group is U (1)n+1 , where n of the abelian vector fields live in the n vector multiplets and
one lives in the gravity multiplet.

h1,1 (X)
A general Kähler form J can be expanded in a basis of divisor classes [Ha ] a=1 ,
h1,1 (X)

J=

X

ta [Ha ] ,

(2.1)

a=1

and one can think of the Kähler parameters ta as projective coordinates on vector multiplet
moduli space. By a choice of normalization, integrating J over effective curves in X yields
curve volumes in units of the eleven-dimensional Planck length ℓ11 .4
Neglecting the hypermultiplets, the bosonic action can be written as
√



1
i
j
d x −g R − gij (ϕ)∂ϕ · ∂ϕ
2
Z
Z
1
1
a
b
−
fab (ϕ)F ∧ ⋆F −
κabc Aa ∧ F b ∧ F c ,
2
4πℓ5
24π

2π
S= 3
ℓ5

Z

5

(2.2)

where the ϕi , i = 1, . . . , n, are affine coordinates on moduli space, and the Aa are the n + 1
R
gauge potentials, with field strengths F a = dAa . Moreover, the κabc := X [Ha ] ∧ [Hb ] ∧ [Hc ]
are the triple intersection numbers, and ℓ5 is the five-dimensional Planck length.
The scalar and gauge field kinetic terms are obtained by dimensional reduction of the
eleven-dimensional effective action and can be written in terms of a homogeneous degreethree prepotential in the projective coordinates ta ,
F M [t] =

1
κabc ta tb tc .
3!

(2.3)

We may choose the ϕi as coordinates of the n-dimensional hypersurface F M [t] = 1, thus
gauge fixing the projective equivalence ta ∼ λta . The kinetic terms are then
M
,
fab = FaM FbM − Fab

gij = fab ∂i ta ∂j tb ,

(2.4)

M
where FaM := ∂a F M and Fab
:= ∂a ∂b F M .
Importantly, as the overall volume modulus is in a hypermultiplet, the full prepotential
4

We define ℓ11 via the eleven-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action SEH = ℓ2π
9

11

4

R

⋆R.

F M [t] can be computed in the large volume limit where it is classical, and thus receives
neither perturbative nor non-perturbative corrections. This allows one to completely classify the possible behavior of the EFT at boundaries of the moduli space [10], as we review
in §3.1.
We can also compactify type IIA string theory on X, which is equivalent to reducing
the above five-dimensional theory on a circle. The result is a four-dimensional N = 2
effective supergravity theory, including h2,1 (X) + 1 hypermultiplets directly inherited from
the five-dimensional theory. The n five-dimensional vector multiplets descend to fourdimensional vector multiplets, and the reduction of the five-dimensional gravity multiplet
to four dimensions provides one more vector multiplet, for h1,1 in total.
The bosonic action, again neglecting hypermultiplets, is

√ 
d4 x −g R − 2Kab̄ ∂z a ∂z b
Z

1
+
Im(NAB )F A ∧ ⋆F B + Re(NAB )F A ∧ F B ,
4π

2π
S= 2
ℓ4

Z

(2.5)

where A, B = 0, . . . , h1,1 and a, b = 1, . . . , h1,1 . The Kähler metric Kab̄ := ∂a ∂b K and the
gauge-kinetic matrix NAB can be written in terms of a holomorphic prepotential F IIA ,
which is homogeneous of degree two in projective coordinates Z A :
i
 h
K = − log i Z A FAIIA − Z A FAIIA ,
IIA
NAB = FAB
+ 2i

IIA
IIA
Im(FAC
)Z C Im(FBD
)Z D
.
IIA
M N
Im(FM
N )Z Z

(2.6)
(2.7)

The type IIA prepotential can be expanded around large volume as
F IIA [Z]
1
1
1
ζ(3)χ(X)
= − κabc z a z b z c + aab z a z b + ca z a +
0
2
(Z )
3!
2
24
2(2πi)3
X
1
−
n0[C] Li3 (q [C] )
(2πi)3

(2.8)

[C]∈MX

where z a := Z a /Z 0 are h1,1 complex affine coordinates on Kähler moduli space. The real
parts ba := Re(z a ) are the integrals of the ten-dimensional two-form B2 over a basis of
H2 (X, Z), and the imaginary parts t̃a := Im(z a ) measure string frame curve volumes.5
5

The string frame curve volumes t̃a are related to the curve volumes ta in eleven-dimensional Planck
2
units via t̃a = gs3 ta ≡ Vol(S 1 )/ℓ11 ta , with gs the type IIA string coupling.

5

As in (2.3), κabc are the triple intersection numbers of X. The leading term in (2.8) is
inherited classically from the five-dimensional prepotential, but in four dimensions there
are also perturbative corrections in α′ parameterized by
Z
ca =
X

c2 (X) ∧ [Ha ],


1 κaab
aab =
2 κ
abb

a≥b

Z
, and χ(X) =

a<b

c3 (X),

(2.9)

X

with c2 (X) and c3 (X) the second and third Chern classes of X, respectively. Furthermore,
the perturbative result is corrected by a series of worldsheet instanton corrections from
strings wrapping effective curves in X, or equivalently BPS particles in the five-dimensional
theory traveling around the compactification circle. The coefficients n0[C] are the BPS indices
of the five-dimensional theory, namely genus zero GV invariants, and
q

[C]



Z
C
:= exp 2πi JIIA ,

(2.10)

C

P
C
where JIIA
:= B2 + iJIIA and JIIA = a t̃a [Ha ] is the Kähler form measuring string frame
volumes. Decompactifying the four-dimensional theory back to five dimensions corresponds
to taking the limit
t̃a → λ2 t̃a , gs → λ3 gs , λ → ∞ ,
(2.11)
IIA

.
and indeed one recovers the five-dimensional prepotential F M [ta ] = −i lim gF2 (Z 0[Z]
)2
λ→∞

2.2

s

Calabi-Yau geometry and BPS states

Let us review a few well-known facts about Calabi-Yau threefolds and their Kähler moduli
spaces. First, we recall the following theorem:
Wall’s theorem [11]: The diffeomorphism class of a Calabi-Yau threefold X is classified
by its Hodge numbers, h1,1 and h2,1 ; its triple intersection numbers, κabc ; and its second
Chern class, c2 .
Positivity of the Hermitian metric on X restricts the Kähler form J of X, introduced
in (2.1), to take values in the Kähler cone KX ⊂ H 1,1 (X) ∩ H 2 (X, R), which is equal to the
cone of ample line bundles. KX is dual to the Mori cone of X, MX , which is generated
by the effective curve classes of X. As effective curves C are calibrated with respect to the

6

Kähler form J,
Z
Vol(C) =

J,

(2.12)

C

it follows that along the facets of KX , one or more effective curves shrink.
The effective divisor classes in H 2 (X, Z) generate the effective cone, E, which is dual
to the cone of movable curves [12], denoted Mov, generated by the effective curves whose
moduli space sweeps out a dense open subset of X.
Along some facets of KX , only effective curves shrink, but no divisors shrink. The
curves that can shrink along such facets are always isolated rational curves [13,14], i.e., P1 ’s
without continuous moduli spaces, and their normal bundles are isomorphic to O(−1) ⊕
O(−1), O ⊕ O(−2), or O(1) ⊕ O(−3) [15, 16]. Continuing past such a facet of KX , where
an effective curve class [C] shrinks, amounts to a birational morphism
X\ ∪C∈[C] C → X ′ \ ∪C ′ ∈[C ′ ] C ′ ,

(2.13)

called a flop transition, where X ′ is in general a topologically distinct Calabi-Yau threefold,
and [C ′ ] is an effective curve class in X ′ . Divisors in X are identified with divisors in X ′
via blowdown maps, and thus we have canonical isomorphisms H 2 (X, Z) ≃ H 2 (X ′ , Z) and
H2 (X, Z) ≃ H2 (X ′ , Z). The Mori cone MX ′ differs from MX because the curve class [C]
ceases to be effective in X ′ , and instead [C ′ ] ≃ −[C] is effective. Moreover, the Calabi-Yau
X ′ is uniquely characterized (via Wall’s theorem) by its intersection numbers and second
Chern class
κ′abc = κabc −
c′a = ca + 2

X
C∈[C]

X
C∈[C]

Ca Cb Cc ,

Ca ,

(2.14)
(2.15)

R
where Ca := X [C] ∧ [Ha ].
Thus, the Kähler cones KX and KX ′ adjoin along a common facet. Exhausting all
possible flops in this way, and adjoining their respective Kähler cones, one obtains a central
object of this work, the extended Kähler cone
K :=

[
X∈[X]b

KX ,

where [X]b is the birational equivalence class of X.
7

(2.16)

Note that some of the cones we have discussed—such as the Kähler cone KX or the
Mori cone MX —depend on the specific Calabi-Yau threefold X, whereas others—such
as the extended Kähler cone K and the effective cone E—only depend on the birational
equivalence class [X]b . In our notation, cones in the former class are written with an
explicit X subscript, whereas those in the latter class lack such a subscript.
A variety of behaviors are possible at the boundaries of the extended Kähler cone. However, as argued in [1], each known possibility is accompanied by a shrinking (pseudo)effective
divisor class. As effective divisors are calibrated with respect to 21 J ∧ J, this is best described in dual coordinates
1
(2.17)
Ta := κabc tb tc ,
2
which are related to the Kähler coordinates by the map
1
T : J 7→ J ∧ J ,
2

i.e.

ta 7→

1
κabc tb tc .
2

(2.18)

The dual-coordinate image of the extended Kähler cone is the cone of dual coordinates
T := T (K).6 The observation of [1] can then be summarized as T = E ∨ , i.e., T is precisely
the cone of movable curves.7 Since T , viewed as a map from K to T , is invertible,8 both K
and T provide equally good descriptions of the moduli space, with the preferred description
depending on the context.
In practice, a simple way to obtain an ensemble of birationally-equivalent Calabi-Yau
threefolds is to consider Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in simplicial toric fourfolds, defined via
distinct fine, regular and star triangulations (FRSTs) of a fixed reflexive polytope ∆◦ ,
henceforth referred to as toric phases. By adjoining the Kähler cones of the different
toric fourfolds one obtains a sub-cone of the extended Kähler cone K that includes all
birational transformations of the threefold that are inherited from bistellar flips, which are
the building blocks of birational transformations of the toric varieties. Henceforth we will
refer to such flops of the threefold as toric flops. In general, by exploring toric flops one
does not obtain all of K, i.e., there generally are flops intrinsic to the threefold for which one
lacks an embedding into a pair of birationally-equivalent toric fourfolds. We will denote
these as non-toric flops. Indeed, by exploring non-toric flops one can often define new
Calabi-Yau threefolds for which one lacks a known hypersurface embedding into any toric
e in [1].
This cone was denoted K
It would be interesting to mathematically prove this equivalence, but we view the arguments given
in [1] as both compelling and consistent with all known examples.
8
This is proved, e.g., in §4.1 of [1] using the fact that K is convex.
6
7

8

Figure 1: A cartoon of an extended Kähler cone. Each cone represents the Kähler cone of
an individual Calabi-Yau. The cones shaded blue represent Calabi-Yaus obtained as hypersurfaces in a toric variety, whereas those shaded red represent Calabi-Yaus that are not
manifestly obtained by performing birational transformations on a toric ambient variety,
but can nonetheless be reached by flops of curves in the Calabi-Yaus. One of the main
results of this work is a method for assembling extended Kähler cones.
variety. We will refer to such geometric models as non-toric phases to distinguish them
from hypersurfaces in toric varieties. Assembling the extended Kähler cone via collecting
and adjoining both toric as well as non-toric phases will be the main focus of this work:
see Figure 1 for an illustration.
As we will explain in detail in §3, along some facets of K an effective divisor shrinks to a
curve of genus g, where the transverse space to each point on the curve is an A1 singularity.
Along such facets, the moduli space ends in a Z2 orbifold singularity, corresponding to the
origin of the Coulomb branch of an su(2) gauge sector in the low-energy EFT. One can
equally well describe the moduli space redundantly by passing to a covering space of K that
includes its images under a discrete (but not necessarily finite) Weyl group W. Although
these Weyl images are not genuinely new geometric phases—but rather gauge-redundant
copies of the original—this Weyl-extended description is useful not only for describing
the BPS black hole solutions [1], but also (we will find) for the program of moduli space
reconstruction.
However, the full Weyl-extended moduli space is in general a branched cover of the
Weyl orbit of K,
[
W(K) :=
w(K) ,
(2.19)
w∈W

where the branch points arise from CFTs appearing on codimension-two faces of the Kähler
9

cone (see the example of §C.4). A smaller Weyl extension of moduli space without such
subtleties can be obtained by considering only the subgroup Wstable of Weyl reflections
that do not involve crossing any walls of marginal stability, i.e., across which all BPS
states remain stable. We refer to such Weyl reflections as stable Weyl reflections, and we
refer to the orbit of K under this subgroup as the hyperextended Kähler cone,
Khyp := Wstable (K) =

[

w(K) .

(2.20)

w∈Wstable

Next, we turn to a short discussion of BPS states and their relevant indices, following
[17]. In a compactification of M-theory on X, M2-branes wrapped on an effective curve C
give rise to a spectrum of massive BPS particle states that transform under the massive
little group SO(4) ≃ SU (2)L × SU (2)R in a representation

R[C] =


 X
1
j1 ,j2
, 0 ⊕ 2(0, 0) ⊗
N[C]
· (j1 , j2 ) ,
2
j ,j
1

(2.21)

2

j1 ,j2
with some degeneracies N[C]
. Their contribution to the genus g BPS indices ng[C] , which
are the GV invariants, keeps track of the SU (2)L representations but traces out the SU (2)R
spin content with sign (−1)2j2 . Specifically, the ng[C] are computed via the decomposition

X

(−1)

2j2

j1 ,j2
(2j2 + 1)N[C]
(j1 ) =

j1 ,j2

X

ng[C]

g≥0

g
 
1
+ 2(0) ,
2

(2.22)

where the right-hand side is a formal sum of vector spaces with possibly negative coefficients. One notes that a multiplet with largest right-spin j2 generically contributes to
all ng[C] with g ≤ 2j2 . For instance, hypermultiplets and vector multiplets contribute +1
respectively −2 to the genus zero GV invariants, and to none of the ng>0
[C] .
g
From a mathematical perspective, the GV invariants n[C] are a particular resummation
of Gromov-Witten invariants ñg[C] , which, roughly, count maps from genus g Riemann
surfaces into X as computed by the topological A-model [18, 19]. Specifically, we have the
relation [17, 20, 21]
∞
X X

ñg[C] q [C] λ2g−2 =

[C]∈MX g=0

and in particular, at genus zero

∞ X
∞
X X

1
2 sin
k

ng[C]

[C]∈MX g=0 k=1
0 [C]
=
[C]∈MX ñ[C] q

P

10

kλ
2

2g−2 k[C]
q ,

(2.23)

0
[C]
[C]∈MX n[C] Li3 (q ), with Li3 (q) :=

P

Figure 2: Mori cone MX of a Calabi-Yau
threefold X, and its integer sites populated by non-vanishing genus zero GV
invariants. Depicted in red: a generator
of MX that is nilpotent and lies outside
of M∞ , shown in yellow.

Figure 3: Mori cone MX ′ of another
Calabi-Yau X ′ related to X by a flop
transition, and sites populated by nonvanishing genus zero GV invariants. Depicted in red: the flopped generator of
MX . In this example, K is the dual of
M∞ .

P∞

k
3
k=1 q /k .

We will define MGV
X,g to be the cone generated by all homology classes [C] of curves with
non-vanishing GV invariants ng[C] . As M2-branes wrapped on curves in classes outside the
Mori cone break all the supersymmetries, they do not generate BPS states, and thus their
GV invariants ng[C] must vanish. We therefore have the inclusion MGV
X,g ⊆ MX for all g.
GV
The cone MGV
X ≡ MX,g=0 will be of interest because its generators may collapse at finite
distance in moduli space, as we discuss in §3.9
We will furthermore divide rational rays in MX into two classes, following [24, 25]. In
the first class are rays that host an infinite number of curve classes with non-vanishing
genus zero GV invariants: these we term potent rays. The second type of ray hosts only a
finite number of non-vanishing genus zero GV invariants, and we will call this a nilpotent
ray, see Figure 2 for an example. Curve classes along potent and nilpotent rays are likewise
termed potent and nilpotent, respectively.
An important object in this work is the infinity cone, M∞ , defined as the closure of
the cone generated by all potent rays. One of our main claims, substantiated in §3, is that
9

In contrast, the generators of MGV
X,g>0 can never shrink at finite distance in moduli space, as this
would lead to finitely many massless higher spin degrees of freedom non-trivially coupled to each other at
the two-derivative level, in conflict with classic results [22, 23].

11

the dual of the infinity cone is the hyperextended Kähler cone Khyp , i.e.
Khyp = M∨∞ .

(2.24)

We now relate the aforementioned cones to the charges of BPS black holes. In particular,
for any point Ta⋆ in the (dual-coordinate) moduli space, let CBH (Ta⋆ ) be the cone of charges
of BPS black holes with asymptotic moduli values Ta → Ta⋆ .10 As shown in [1],
T ⊆ CBH (Ta⋆ )

for any

Ta⋆ ∈ T .

(2.25)

This is because T is convex (since T = E ∨ ) and spherically symmetric BPS attractor flows
are straight lines in dual coordinates.
However, since the potent GV invariants remain unchanged across the entire hyperextended moduli space, our checks of the lattice WGC in fact depend only on the larger
(hyperextended) cone of BPS black holes
CBH :=

[
Ta⋆ ∈Thyp

CBH (Ta⋆ ) ,

(2.26)

where Thyp := T (Khyp ) is the hyperextended cone of dual coordinates. In particular,
because invariably Ta⋆ ∈ CBH (Ta⋆ ),11 we have12
Thyp ⊆ CBH ,

(2.27)

hence the lattice WGC predicts BPS particles throughout Thyp . One can sometimes establish a stronger inclusion than (2.27): see Appendix C.1.
While the somewhat-complicated relations given above are sufficient for our present
purposes, we now argue that the situation may actually be simpler than this. Continuously
changing the asymptotic values of the moduli Ta⋆ should not change a solution with smooth
horizons into a singular solution. Instead, BPS black hole solutions of a given charge may
cease to exist another way, by falling apart into infinitely separated components at walls
of marginal stability. If these expectations hold, then CBH (Ta⋆ ) can only change at walls of
10

Note that CBH (Ta⋆ ) is necessarily convex, because we consider multi-center solutions to be BPS black
holes.
11
The corresponding BPS black hole solutions are of the five-dimensional Reissner-Nordström type,
with constant values for all the moduli.
12
If Thyp is convex then the stronger statement Thyp ⊆ CBH (Ta⋆ ) also holds. In all examples we have
checked, Thyp is indeed convex, but we know of no general proof.

12

Symbol

Description

Relations

KX

Kähler cone of phase X

≡ M∨X

MX
K

M

Mori cone of phase X
extended Kähler cone
intersection of Mori cones

E

effective cone

Mov

cone of movable curves

M∞

infinity cone

Khyp

hyperextended Kähler cone

T

cone of dual coordinates

CBH

X∈[X]b MX , ≡ K
∨

∨

≡ E ∨ , ⊆ K∨
(3.6)

cone over curves C with nonzero n0[C]

CBH (Ta )

X∈[X]b KX

≡ Mov , ⊇ K

MGV
X

Thyp

:=

:=
T

∨
≡ KX
S

hyperextended cone of dual coordinates

∨
= Khyp

(3.4) T
= w∈WN =4 w(MX )
S
(3.6)
:= w∈Wstable w(K), = M∨∞
[1]

:= T (K), = Mov

:= T (Khyp ), ⊆ CBH
∋ Ta , ⊇ T

cone of BPS black holes at Ta
(hyperextended) cone of BPS black holes

:= CBH (Thyp ), ⊇ Thyp

Table 1: The relevant cones. The map T is defined in (2.18). We use ≡ to denote
(3.4)

(3.6)

equivalence and := to denote definitions. The relations marked = and = are established
in the present work, as (3.4) and (3.6), respectively, while an argument for the relation
[1]

marked = was given in [1].
marginal stability. Since by construction there are no such walls within Thyp = T (Khyp ),
we would then have
?

CBH (Ta⋆ ) = CBH

for any

Ta⋆ ∈ Thyp .

(2.28)

However, the identification (2.28) relies on some non-trivial assumptions that we will not
test here, and in any event the logic of our analysis is valid without (2.28).
By now we have defined a daunting number of cones, some more standard than others:
see Table 1. With these definitions in hand, we can give a concise overview of the rest of
the paper. In §3, we will establish the relation Khyp = M∨∞ stated in (2.24). By computing
M∞ from the GV invariants of X and applying (2.24) and (2.18), we arrive at Thyp , a
region inside CBH . Finally, by examining the GV invariants of curve classes in Thyp , we
test the WGC in our ensemble of geometries.

13

3

Moduli Space Reconstruction from GV Invariants

We will now explain how the structure of non-vanishing GV invariants determines the
hyperextended Kähler cone Khyp ⊇ K. We begin in §3.1 with a review of the classification
of possible low energy physics that can arise along facets of the Kähler cone KX of a CalabiYau threefold, paying special attention to the sequence of genus zero GV invariants along
the dual generators of the Mori cone. In §3.2 we will use this classification to obtain one of
our main results: an algorithm to (1) compute a domain of Kähler parameters Khyp that
contains the Kähler cones of all inequivalent Calabi-Yau threefolds X in a given birational
equivalence class [X]b , and (2) compute the defining topological data of all X ∈ [X]b .13

3.1

Facets of the Kähler cone

To reconstruct the extended Kähler cone K starting from a phase X, we need to identify
every effective curve class [C] that can be flopped to reach a new phase X ′ , and then adjoin
to KX the associated phase KX ′ . To this end, we now review, following Witten [10], the
possible low energy physics that can arise along facets of the Kähler cone KX , and what
imprint the corresponding light charged states leave on the spectrum of GV invariants.
This will allow us to use knowledge of the set of nonzero GV invariants to differentiate
curves that can be flopped from those that shrink on exterior boundaries of K.
3.1.1

Flop transitions

Flop transitions always occur at finite distance in moduli space, and the light states that
arise on the corresponding facets of KX are furnished by M2-branes wrapping the isolated
volume-minimizing representatives of the shrinking curve class [C], i.e. a set of P1 ’s, contributing a finite number of massless hypermultiplets [31]. The number of such multiplets
is equal to the genus zero GV invariant of the vanishing curve class. Furthermore, at a
generic point on such a facet, at most finitely many states fall within any finite mass window, and thus the class [C] is nilpotent (as defined in §2.2) and lies strictly outside of the
cone M∞ .
13

See also [26–30] for works on applications of flop transitions in Calabi-Yau threefolds.

14

3.1.2

Weyl reflections

Next we consider a finite distance facet along which an effective curve C, again a P1 ,
shrinks to a point in X, while simultaneously an effective divisor D degenerates to a genus
g Riemann surface R worth of A1 singularities. In this case D is a P1 fibration over R,
where the fiber is the shrinking P1 . Along such facets of KX , a u(1) factor in the generic
gauge algebra enhances to su(2), and one obtains g charged hypermultiplets [32, 33].14
These massless electrically charged states come from M2-branes wrapped on the generic
fiber, while the M5-brane wrapped on the vanishing divisor is interpreted as the ’t HooftPolyakov magnetic monopole string. The genus zero GV invariant of [C] is equal to 2g − 2.
If the P1 fibration over R defining the shrinking divisor D degenerates over NF points in
the base, one obtains in addition NF fundamentally charged hypermultiplets from 2NF
isolated rigid P1 ’s in half the class of the generic fiber (see §C.3 for an example), and if
NF > 0 the gauge group is SU (2).
In flat coordinates (as opposed to gauge-invariant coordinates) it makes sense to continue past the facet where [C] and [D] shrink, but the corresponding region in moduli space
is gauge equivalent to the original Kähler cone via the Weyl group action of the non-abelian
gauge theory [1],
[D]a [C]b
a
a
b
a
a
.
(3.1)
t ≃w b·t , w b =δ b−2
⟨C, D⟩
In general, we define the Weyl group W associated to a birational equivalence class [X]b
as the group generated by all such Weyl reflections across facets of the extended Kähler
cone K.
The shrinking curve class [C] is either a generator of M∞ or else lies strictly outside
of M∞ . To understand this, we first consider the g = 0 case without fundamentally
charged matter, where the non-abelian gauge theory in question is pure supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory. The four-dimensional theory is asymptotically free, and its Coulomb
branch receives corrections from gauge instantons that dominate over the classical result at
Coulomb branch vevs smaller than the dynamical scale of the theory, as famously computed
by Seiberg and Witten [34]. These corrections can only be accounted for by the known
expression for the prepotential (2.8) if there are non-vanishing genus zero GV invariants
along an infinite sequence of curves that grow by multiples of the vanishing curve, i.e. if
14

As explained in [1], along such facets the generic gauge group U (1)n enhances to either SU (2) ×
U (1)
, or U (2) × U (1)n−2 , or SO(3) × U (1)n−1 .
n−1

15

Figure 4: Mori cone MX of a Calabi-Yau
threefold X, and its integer sites populated by non-vanishing genus zero GV
invariants. Depicted in red: a generator
of MX that is nilpotent and lies on the
boundary of M∞ .

Figure 5: Non-pointed Mori cone MX ′
related to MX by an unstable Weyl flop,
if one assumes no wall-crossing. Depicted
in red: the flopped generator of MX .

n0[C ′ ] ̸= 0 for sequences of curve classes of the form
k

[Ck′ ] := [C0′ ] + k · [C] ,

k = 0, . . . , ∞ ,

(3.2)

or infinite sub-sequences thereof. This implies that [C] is a generator of M∞ , even though
the GV sequence associated with its own integer multiples terminates, i.e. even though [C]
itself is nilpotent. More generally, whenever the non-abelian gauge theory is asymptotically
free, i.e. if 4(1 − g) − NF > 0, the shrinking class is a generator of M∞ .
As an aside we note that this implies the existence of a wall of marginal stability already
in the five-dimensional theory at the origin of the Coulomb branch: the fact that there
exists at least one sequence of the form (3.2) implies that upon continuing into a distinct
Weyl chamber — by passing through the origin of the Coulomb branch — all but finitely
many BPS indices associated to curve classes in the series must jump to zero. Otherwise,
the Weyl-transformed Mori cone could not be a pointed cone, as illustrated in Figures 4
and 5.
The converse statement is false: gauge instanton corrections to the prepotential of an
IR-free gauge theory vanish at the origin of the Coulomb branch, but one may still have
sequences of the form (3.2) that give rise to a holomorphic series with a finite analytic
continuation to the origin of the Coulomb branch (see §C.3 for an example). Thus, a curve
C shrinking along a Weyl-reflection locus associated with non-abelian enhancement giving
16

rise to an IR-free gauge theory in four dimensions can be either a generator of M∞ or lie
strictly outside of it.
As far as the spectrum of GV invariants is concerned, a facet of KX featuring nonabelian enhancement with g > 1 hypermultiplets in the adjoint representation and no
fundamentally charged hypermultiplets cannot be distinguished from a flop of 2g − 2 rational curves.15 Indeed, Weyl flops of genus g > 0 occur only along tuned loci in complex
structure moduli space, and turn into ordinary flops (if g > 1) or smooth points (if g = 1)
under a generic perturbation in complex structure [35]. We will single out the case where
g = 1, again without fundamental matter: here the GV invariant of the shrinking curve
vanishes, due to the fact that the non-abelian gauge theory is conformal and has accidentally enhanced N = 4 supersymmetry. When such a g = 1 locus exists, the cone over
non-vanishing genus zero GV invariants MGV
X is strictly smaller than the Mori cone MX ,
GV
and the cone dual to MX is the Kähler cone adjoined by its gauge equivalent copy generated by the Weyl reflection associated with the N = 4 Yang-Mills theory.16 We denote
the group generated by such Weyl reflections as WN =4 .
To recap, there are three kinds of qualitatively different Weyl reflections that can occur,
distinguished by the sign of the beta function in the four-dimensional gauge theory.
• For an asymptotically free gauge theory, i.e. 4(1 − g) − NF > 0, there is an infinite
tower of gauge instanton corrections that become important near the origin of the
Coulomb branch of the four-dimensional theory. As a consequence, the shrinking
generator of the Mori cone is also a generator of M∞ .
• In the conformal case 4(1 − g) − NF = 0, the shrinking generator [C] of the Mori
cone is either strictly outside of M∞ or is on its boundary. In the special case
(g, NF ) = (1, 0) the gauge theory enhances to the N = 4 theory, and we expect that
[C] is strictly outside M∞ .
• For an infrared-free gauge theory, i.e. 4(1 − g) − NF < 0, the shrinking generator of
the Mori cone can be a generator of M∞ or lie strictly outside of M∞ .
In general, su(2) enhancements from generators of M∞ have a wall of marginal stability at
their respective origins of the Coulomb branch (corresponding to unstable Weyl reflections),
while those from curves outside of M∞ do not (corresponding to stable Weyl reflections).
15
Similarly, a genus g > 1 non-abelian enhancement with NF fundamentally charged hypermultiplets
cannot be distinguished from a length-2 flop with GV invariants (2NF , 2g − 2).
16
We assume that no walls of marginal stability can arise at the origin of the Coulomb branch of a
gauge theory with enhanced supersymmetry.

17

3.1.3

Tensionless string CFTs

A third possibility is that an effective curve [C] shrinks, while simultaneously an effective
divisor degenerates to a point in X. As explained in [10], an infinite tower of M2-brane
excitations on curves in D becomes massless, while the magnetically charged string from
the M5-brane wrapped on D becomes tensionless. One arrives at a non-trivial SCFT in five
dimensions featuring tensionless strings [10]. The presence of infinitely many electrically
charged BPS states — barring infinitely many exact cancellations in the index, which we
will assume does not happen — implies that multiples of the shrinking curve class [C]
itself contribute an infinite sequence of nonzero GV invariants. Such a point lies at finite
distance in moduli space. One might expect that a point where an infinite number of states
becomes massless is necessarily at infinite distance [36,37], but in this case, strong coupling
in the infrared invalidates this intuition.
3.1.4

Asymptotic boundaries

The final possibility is a facet of the Kähler cone where a curve class [C] and effective
divisor class [D] shrink at infinite distance in moduli space. This corresponds to a partial
decompactification of the five-dimensional theory, and for reasons as in §3.1.3 one expects
that the GV sequence n0k[C] does not terminate.17

3.2

Moduli space from genus zero GV invariants

We will now apply the classification given in §3.1 to see how flop curves can be identified
from their GV invariants.
If [C] is a potent curve, i.e. if the GV sequence n0k[C] does not terminate, then [C] cannot
be flopped: shrinking [C] corresponds at best to a facet of the Kähler cone that is either a
tensionless string CFT or an asymptotic boundary.
Next, if [C] is a nilpotent curve in M∞ — either strictly inside or on the boundary
— that is not a generator of M∞ , then one cannot shrink [C] without first shrinking a
generator. Thus without loss of generality we can consider curves that are generators of
M∞ . A nilpotent generator of M∞ is not a flop curve, but instead corresponds to an
unstable Weyl reflection.
17

In the infinite distance limit, this infinite tower of nonvanishing GV invariants leads to an infinite
tower of light particles, in agreement with the Distance Conjecture of Ooguri and Vafa [38]. Such limits
have been considered in e.g. [39–41].

18

The only remaining case is that [C] is nilpotent and lies strictly outside the cone M∞
of potent curves. We call such a curve a nilpotent-outside-potent, or nop, curve. The key
lesson of §3.1 is that
[C] is a nop curve ⇔ shrinking [C] yields a flop or a stable Weyl reflection ,

(3.3)

where we refer to a Weyl reflection as stable if it results from su(2) enhancement without
wall-crossing at the origin of the Coulomb branch. One important consequence is that by
identifying all nop curves, we determine the group Wstable ⊆ W of stable Weyl reflections.
Analytically continuing past a wall in the Kähler cone where a nop curve shrinks leads
either to a topologically distinct Calabi-Yau, or to a Calabi-Yau that gives rise to the same
physics as the original geometry, either due to a gauge symmetry or an isomorphism of the
two geometries.
The discussion above leads us to several useful results. First, the cone over the nonvanishing genus zero GV invariants MGV
X is equal to the intersection over the N = 4 Weyl
orbit of the Mori cone:
\
w(MX ) .
(3.4)
MGV
=
X
w∈WN =4

As WN =4 is non-trivial only for tuned complex structure, we further have that MGV
X = MX
at generic points in complex structure moduli space.
Second, the cone over the rays in the Mori cone hosting infinite series of GV invariants,
which we denoted M∞ , is equal to the intersection of all Mori cones and their images
under the stable Weyl group, Wstable :
M∞ =

\

\

w∈Wstable X∈[X]b

w(MX ) ≡

\

w(M) .

(3.5)

w∈Wstable

In particular, the dual of M∞ is the union over the Wstable orbit of the extended Kähler
cone,
[
M∨∞ =
w(K) =: Khyp ,
(3.6)
w∈Wstable

which is what we previously defined as the hyperextended Kähler cone Khyp . We have
therefore established the relation (2.24). For generic complex structure we have Khyp = K.
In summary, one can determine the full Kähler moduli space of M-theory compactifications from the data of genus zero GV invariants, up to possible overcounting of gaugeequivalent chambers.
19

3.3

Geometric data from analytic continuation

We have explained how to determine an overcomplete domain for Kähler moduli, Khyp :=
Wstable (K), furnished by the extended Kähler cone and its orbit under stable Weyl reflections. But, in addition to charting out the domain of Kähler moduli one would also like to
characterize the Calabi-Yau threefold, and evaluate the prepotential F IIA , in each geometric chamber. It turns out that computing the four-dimensional prepotential F IIA in one
particular representative X of a birational equivalence class [X]b is sufficient to determine
the defining geometric data (and thus the large volume expansion of the prepotential) in
all chambers of Khyp , in a way that is readily accessible.
We will now consider how the prepotential (2.8) transforms across a facet on which a
nop curve shrinks. In this scenario, the shrinking curve formally acquires negative volume
on the other side of the transition. Along the facet where the nop curve has zero volume,
the volumes of all curves in M∞ can be made arbitrarily large by scaling up the Kähler
parameter, and for each choice of Kähler parameter there exist at most finitely many
curves in M∞ that have volumes below any fixed finite threshold. Thus, in order to obtain
the geometric data of all different chambers, one must only make sense out of formally
negative volumes appearing in finitely many polylogarithms in the expression (2.8).18 This
is straightforward to do by invoking Jonquière’s identity
Li3 (e2πi(−u) ) u3 u2
u
Li3 (e2πiu )
=
−
+
−
,
3
3
(2πi)
(2πi)
6
4
12

(3.7)

which allows one to rewrite an instanton correction with formally negative action as one
with positive action, supplemented by a polynomial correction term. Geometrically, this is
interpreted as collapsing a holomorphic curve class [C], continuing past its vanishing locus,
and re-interpreting its formally negative volume as minus the volume of the new effective
curve class [C ′ ] = −[C]. The polynomial correction term is interpreted as the perturbative
correction induced by the passing through the locus where a hypermultiplet has become
massless, and can be absorbed into the classical geometric data, precisely reproducing
(2.14) for the case of a flop, where the genus zero GV invariant is a literal count of shrinking
curves, while also generalizing to the case of a stable Weyl reflection. In summary, upon
passing through a flop transition, or a Weyl reflection without wall-crossing, whereby an
18
The reasoning here is formally similar to that employed in [24] to compute Calabi-Yau periods systematically near conifold boundaries of the large complex structure cone. Indeed, for a flop curve the limit
of vanishing curve volume is mirror dual to the conifold limit discussed in [24].

20

effective nop curve [C] collapses, the classical geometric data is modified as
κ′abc = κabc − n0C Ca Cb Cc ,

c′a = ca + 2n0C Ca ,

(3.8)

and the GV invariants remain the same, up to reassigning
0
′0
n′0
[C ′ ] ≡ n−[C] = n[C] ,

3.4

and n′0
[C] = 0 .

(3.9)

Assembly algorithm

We can now state an algorithm for constructing the hyperextended Kähler cone Khyp of a
Calabi-Yau threefold X:
1. Compute the genus-zero GV invariants of X, up to high enough degree to obtain an
accurate approximation to M∞ .
2. Identify all nop curves, i.e. nilpotent curves on extremal rays that are strictly outside
M∞ .
3. Assemble Khyp by adjoining phases related by flops and Weyl reflections, out to the
boundaries of the moduli space listed in §3.1.3 and §3.1.4.
In practice, some of the nilpotent curves in step (2) may correspond to stable Weyl reflections, so that the corresponding chambers do not furnish physically new regions of moduli
space. In fact, the number of chambers of Wstable (K) is often quite large, or even infinite,
as a consequence of symmetries. We explain in Appendix §A.2 how we replace Khyp with
a smaller, less redundant cone, containing a finite number of chambers. Using this, our
assembly algorithm is applicable even to birational equivalence classes featuring infinitely
many symmetric flops, and non-polyhedral effective cones such as the examples of [27, 29].
Analogously, our algorithm can be applied to cases where the effective cone becomes nonpolyhedral at special loci in complex structure moduli space, corresponding to an infinite
order Wstable .
In contrast, if M∞ is infinitely generated due to the existence of infinitely many flops
that do not arise as simple reflections across facets of Kähler cones, then any computation
of GV invariants at finite cutoff degree will yield only an (inner) approximation of M∞ ,
which asymptotes to the exact result as the cutoff degree is sent to infinity. Similarly, if
21

any representative in a birational equivalence class has a non-polyhedral Mori cone, then
GV invariants computed to finite cutoff degree will produce only an approximation of the
true Mori cone, and likewise M∞ . A famous such example is the Schoen manifold [42].

3.5

An example

As an example, let us consider a Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface X with h1,1 = 2
favorably embedded in a toric fourfold V , constructed in a standard way19 from a reflexive
polytope ∆◦ . The integer points in ∆◦ other than the origin are the columns of


−1

−1

−1

−1

0
0
0
1

0
0
1
0


0 −1 1

1 1 0
,
0 0 0

0 0 0

(3.10)

and are associated with homogeneous coordinates xI , I = 1, . . . , 6, identified via a (C∗ )2
action with scaling weights


x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6


 0 0 0 −1 1 1  .
1 1 1 2 −1 0

(3.11)

The columns of (3.11) are the charges of the divisors DI := {xI = 0} ∩ X. The faces of
∆◦ are simplices, so V is smooth.
In a basis of divisor classes {[D1 ], [D6 ]}, the triple intersection numbers and second
Chern class of X are
!
!
!
5 5
5 5
50
κ1ab =
, κ2ab =
, ca =
.
(3.12)
5 5
5 3
42
The Mori cone inherited from the ambient variety, MV , is generated by the curve classes
(1, 0) and (0, 1). The genus zero GV invariants are given in Table 2, and the sites in
MV populated by them are depicted in Figure 2. In particular, the generators of MV
have non-vanishing GV invariants, so MV ≃ MX , and the generator class [C1 ] := (1, 0) is
19

For some details on Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces in toric fourfolds, see Appendix B. Further
examples are given in Appendix C.

22

q2 0
q1
0
∗
20
1
2
0
0
3
4
0
5
0
0
6
7
0
0
8
9
0
10
0

1
56
2635
5040
190
−40
3
0
0
0
0
0

2
−272
2760
541930
2973660
2454600
67980
−14960
3420
−760
100
−6

3
3240
−45440
933760
277421695
2644224240
5829698942
3084577280
75341270
−13884400
2767590
−783664

4
−58432
1001340
−18770880
563282580
208000930200
2855250958116
11119027471400
14592676836440
5711374027440
132960571500
−21741657848

5
1303840
−26330880
490600080
−11813767700
470459159880
193028959075965
3465883673329200
19950547779012810
45586693863580200
42020108300555745
13122339863069280

Table 2: Genus zero GV invariants n0q1 ,q2 for the geometry of §3.5. Charges inside the
infinity cone M∞ = {q1 − 5q2 , q2 ≥ 0} but outside the cone of dual coordinates T =
{q2 − q1 , 2q1 − q2 ≥ 0} are shown in yellow. Charges in T are shown in pink.
nilpotent.20 Moreover, the infinity cone M∞ is generated by the classes (5, 1) and (0, 1).
Upon shrinking the curve class [C2 ] := (0, 1) the divisor D5 shrinks to a point, generating a
tensionless string CFT. Indeed, the sequence of GV invariants along this generator of the
Mori cone is infinite:
n0k·[C2 ] = {56, −272, 3240, −58432, 1303840, −33255216, . . .}

(3.13)

We now note that the curve class [C1 ] lies outside M∞ (and it is the only curve class that
does). Therefore, one can flop this curve21
[C1 ] −→ −[C1 ] ,

(3.14)

obtaining a smooth threefold X ′ with genus zero GV invariants as depicted in Figure 3.
This flop is not inherited from any birational transformation of the toric ambient variety,
so is non-toric in the sense described in §2.2.
As this phase is non-toric, we will determine its Mori cone from the data of GV invariants. The generators of MGV
X ′ = ∩w∈WN =4 w(MX ′ ) are −[C1 ] = (−1, 0) and [C3 ] := (5, 1).
The flopped triple intersection numbers and second Chern class, expressed in their natural
20

Computing the exact Mori cone by showing that the GV invariants of the torically inherited cone
MV are non-zero has also been employed in earlier works, e.g., [29, 43].
21
One can check that no divisors shrink in this limit, and so this is a true flop.

23

basis, the generators (−[C1 ], [C3 ]) of MGV
X ′ , are
κ′1ab =

90 30
30 10

!
,

κ′2ab =

30 10
10 3

!
,

c′a =

!
120
,
42

(3.15)

showing that X ′ is not isomorphic to X.
If WN =4 were non-trivial, it would have to map the set of generators of MGV
X ′ to
themselves. Thus, in this example, at least one element would have to exchange its two
generators. However, this cannot be a symmetry as the GV invariants of the two generators
of MGV
X ′ are distinct: they turn out to be 20 and 3 respectively (cf. Table 2). Therefore
WN =4 is trivial and we can determine the exact Mori cone: MX ′ = MGV
X ′ . Along the facet
of KX ′ where the curve class [C3 ] shrinks, the toric divisor D4 shrinks to a point, leading to
another tensionless string CFT. Again, the sequence of GV invariants along this generator
of the Mori cone MX ′ is infinite:
n0k·[C3 ] = {3, −6, 27, −192, 1695, −17064, . . .}

(3.16)

The extended Kähler cone K is equal to the dual of the infinity cone M∞ in this
example, and, expressed in the original basis of divisor classes ([D1 ], [D6 ]), it is generated
by the classes (1, 0) and (−1, 5). Absent any Weyl group we have Khyp = K. The cone
of dual coordinates T is generated by (1, 1) and (1, 2) and is indeed dual to the effective
cone, generated by the divisors [D4 ] = (−1, 2) and [D5 ] = (1, −1).

4

Checks of the Weak Gravity Conjecture

The WGC [6] provides an interesting constraint on the spectra of effective theories that
arise as low-energy limits of quantum gravity. We will now describe a direct check of
the WGC in a large ensemble of Calabi-Yau hypersurface compactifications of M-theory.
This analysis relies on using Gopakumar-Vafa invariants to reconstruct the Kähler moduli
spaces of Calabi-Yau threefolds, via the algorithm we described in §3.

4.1

The lattice WGC for BPS states

The WGC states that in an effective field theory that admits a UV-completion to a theory of
quantum gravity, black holes must be able to decay. In its simplest form, for a theory with
a single U (1) gauge field, this condition states there must be a (super)extremal particle,
24

i.e., a particle whose charge to mass ratio satisfies
Q
Q
≥
,
M
M ext

(4.1)

where the quantity on the right-hand side is the charge to mass ratio of an extremal black
hole.
In theories with more than one U (1) gauge field, the condition that black holes must
be able to decay translates to the condition that the convex hull of charge to mass ratios of
particles in the spectrum must contain the region in charge to mass space where black holes
can exist [44]. The convex hull condition is the minimal requirement for black holes to
decay in a given theory, but a more stringent version of the conjecture was proposed [7] for
reasons of consistency under dimensional reduction (see also [8,45]). This stronger version,
known as the lattice WGC, holds that every site in the charge lattice must support a
(super)extremal particle.
In full generality, the lattice WGC is difficult to check: the spectrum of light states is
unknown, and for theories with moduli, the black hole extremality bound deviates nontrivially from the Reissner-Nordström result. Nonetheless, in certain regions of charge
space, one can take advantage of the properties of BPS states. Recall that we have denoted by CBH the cone in charge space where BPS black holes exist. The lattice WGC is
satisfied in the BPS region of charge space if and only if for each site in CBH , there exists
a (super)extremal state.
Following [1], in the region CBH the BPS bound implies that a (super)extremal state is
indeed extremal, and BPS. Thus, the lattice WGC implies the existence of a single-particle
BPS state for every charge in CBH . We will apply this fact to test the lattice WGC by
using GV invariants to count BPS states in a subcone of CBH . Specifically, as explained
in §2.2, we have the containment relation Thyp ⊆ CBH , where Thyp is the cone of dual
coordinates defined in (2.18). In §3.2 we established how to compute Thyp from the data
of GV invariants, and thus we are now equipped to test the lattice WGC in Thyp .

4.2

Testing the lattice WGC

We have applied the above logic to check the lattice WGC in a large ensemble of compactifications of M-theory on Calabi-Yau threefolds constructed as hypersurfaces in toric
varieties. We used CYTools [4, 5] to compute genus-zero GV invariants, and so carried out
the algorithm outlined in §3.4.
25

In fact, in this setting one can first perform a more efficient test of a sufficient condition
for the lattice WGC, and for many geometries this test obviates the full process of §3.4.
The process is as follows: one finds the cone EV of effective divisors inherited from the
ambient toric variety V , which obeys EV ⊆ E, and therefore
Thyp ⊆ EV∨ .

(4.2)

The analogue of (4.2) also holds if EV is replaced by any other inner bound on the true
effective cone E. A sufficient test of the lattice WGC is to check that every site in EV∨ is
populated with a non-vanishing GV invariant. If there are empty sites in EV∨ , then either
the lattice WGC is false, or there exist autochthonous divisors, i.e. effective divisors in the
Calabi-Yau that are not inherited from the ambient variety. In this way, the lattice WGC
makes non-trivial predictions for geometry, specifically for the cone of effective divisors
(cf. [46, 47]).
A subclass of autochthonous divisors that we will refer to as min-face divisors are
readily obtained from polytope data, by examining simple factorizations of the defining
polynomial. In practice, we construct the cone Einner generated by all inherited effective
divisors, as well as any min-face divisors, which obeys
EV ⊆ Einner ⊆ E .

(4.3)

∨
, up to some cutoff degree. If there
We then check whether there are empty sites in Einner
are no such empty sites, the lattice WGC holds in the example in question, up to the cutoff
degree tested.
∨
In cases where Einner
contains empty sites, then either the lattice WGC is false, or there
are further autochthonous divisors that are not of min-face type. To analyze such cases,
we proceed by using the GV invariants to obtain Thyp ⊆ CBH , as described in §3.3. This
approach is more computationally expensive, because one has to adjoin all phases resulting
from flops, but it is also exhaustive.
We can now describe the general algorithm to check the lattice WGC in the BPS cone
of a Calabi-Yau threefold, X. Given an arbitrarily chosen grading vector ⃗vg ∈ H 2 (X, Z)
that lies strictly interior to K, we define the degree of a charge ⃗q ∈ H2 (X, Z) as d = ⃗vg · ⃗q.
Then, up to a cutoff degree d ≤ dcutoff , we implement the following procedure:
∨
1. For each site q ∈ Einner
with dq ≤ dcutoff , compute the GV invariant. If all sites have
non-vanishing GV invariants, the lattice WGC is satisfied up to cutoff degree dcutoff .

26

If not, continue.
2. Using the methods described in §3.3, identify all possible flops of X, and calculate
triple intersection numbers in each one.
3. Compute Thyp using (3.6) and (2.18).
4. For each site in q ∈ Thyp with degree less than dcutoff , compute the GV invariant. If
all such sites have non-vanishing GV invariant, the lattice WGC passes this test.
Because this approach involves a computation up to a finite cutoff degree, there are
several subtleties associated to possible misidentifications. For example, an apparent violation of the lattice WGC could in principle arise due to an overestimation of CBH , though
in all examples considered in this paper we have been able to compute GV invariants to
high enough order to avoid this issue. In §A.3 we give a comprehensive discussion of the
potential problems of a finite computation, and we explain how we have mitigated them.
We have performed the above analysis beginning with a set of seed Calabi-Yau threefolds, from which we obtain the rest of the phases via flop transitions. The 2062 seed
threefolds result from a single FRST of each of the 1464 four-dimensional reflexive polytopes with 2 ≤ h1,1 ≤ 4, as well as 598 additional favorable polytopes with h1,1 = 5. For
each seed geometry X, we compute the GV invariants and subsequently identify the geometric phases of the given birational equivalence class [X]b , obtained via flop transitions
from the original phase X.
One of the key results of this work is that, via flop transitions of toric hypersurface
Calabi-Yaus, we can discover Calabi-Yau threefolds that cannot be written as hypersurfaces
in the initial ambient toric variety, as in the example presented in §3.5. In fact, this method
sometimes allows one to discover Calabi-Yaus that cannot be obtained via a triangulation
of any four-dimensional reflexive polytope.22 But in general we do not distinguish between
the two cases in this work, and we use ‘non-toric phase’ to refer to a phase for which we
have found no manifest description as a hypersurface in a toric variety. Figure 6 shows the
number of geometric phases obtained from FRSTs of polytopes, as well as the number of
non-toric phases obtained through flops.
We carried out the algorithm outlined above to test the lattice WGC in 2062 polytopes.
We found no violations of the lattice WGC.
It should be noted that there are known counterexamples to the lattice WGC, all of
which arise from compactifications on toroidal orbifolds [7] (see also the recent work [49]).
22

This is the case for the non-toric phase in the example in §3.5.

27

(a) h1,1 = 2

(b) h1,1 = 3

(c) h1,1 = 4

Figure 6: The number of apparently-inequivalent toric and non-toric phases that we found.
For h1,1 = 2, 3, 4 we have (36, 6), (274, 123), and (1760, 2180) toric and non-toric phases,
respectively. The polytope IDs are ordered as in [48], and in particular h2,1 increases to
the right.
Nonetheless, in the present work we have found no evidence against the proposition that the
lattice WGC holds in M-theory compactifications on Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces.
Even so, we hasten to remind the reader that the present computation is in a limited
ensemble, at h1,1 ≤ 5, and only checks the lattice WGC in the BPS sector, up to a finite
cutoff degree.
We also note that in 1170 of these cases the lattice WGC predicted autochthonous
divisors, and of these cases, 493 geometries predicted further autochthonous divisors beyond
min-face ones. These predictions were then confirmed with the full algorithm.

28

5

Conclusions

A primary result of this work is a method for computing the complete Kähler moduli space
of a Calabi-Yau threefold X from knowledge of its genus zero Gopakumar-Vafa invariants.
We have shown that an efficient way to identify all phase transitions in Kähler moduli
space is to compute M∞ ⊂ H2 (X), i.e. the closure of the cone generated by rays supporting
infinite series of nonvanishing GV invariants. Curves in the complement of M∞ within
the Mori cone shrink across phase transitions. Some of these are flop transitions, while
others are Weyl reflections associated with non-abelian gauge enhancements. By passing
through all such phase transitions, unto the boundaries of moduli space, one assembles
an object that we call the hyperextended Kähler cone, Khyp . In the absence of Weyl
reflections, Khyp coincides with the extended Kähler cone K, while in general Khyp ⊇ K
gives a gauge-redundant parametrization of K.
We carried out this algorithm in an ensemble of geometries, including all favorable
hypersurfaces with 1 ≤ h1,1 ≤ 4 resulting from the Kreuzer-Skarke list, as well as 598
examples with h1,1 = 5. Using CYTools [4] to compute GV invariants, we constructed the
Kähler moduli spaces in each case.
The other major result of this work is a test of the Weak Gravity Conjecture in compactifications of M-theory on Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces. The lattice WGC predicts
that in the region in charge space where BPS black holes exist, which we denoted CBH ,
there must exist a complete lattice of BPS particles. We showed that a subcone Thyp of
CBH is determined by the data of Khyp : see (2.27). Moreover, a nonzero GV invariant for
a given charge implies the existence of a corresponding BPS particle. Thus, GV invariants
serve a dual purpose: they determine M∞ , from which we obtain Khyp and in turn the
region Thyp where we test the WGC, and they also provide information on the BPS particle
spectrum, which is the quantity being tested.
In the geometries we studied, we checked the prediction of the WGC for every charge
in Thyp ⊆ CBH up to a finite cutoff degree. We found that not just the tower and sublattice
WGC, but even the full lattice WGC, holds for the charges in question. We stress that
our computation provides no information about BPS particles beyond the chosen cutoff
degree, nor any information about non-BPS particles. Thus, our result should be read as
confirming the predictions of the lattice WGC in a finite subregion of the charge lattice.

29

Acknowledgments
We thank Manki Kim, Nate MacFadden, Jake McNamara, Richard Nally, Andres RiosTascon, Andreas Schachner, and Mike Stillman for helpful discussions. N.G., L.M., and
J.M. were supported in part by NSF grant PHY-1719877. B.H. was supported by NSF
grants PHY-1914934 and PHY-2112800. T.R. was supported in part by the Berkeley
Center for Theoretical Physics; by the Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office
of High Energy Physics under QuantISED Award DE-SC0019380 and under contract DEAC02-05CH11231; and by the National Science Foundation under Award Number 2112880.

A

Computational Algorithm

In this Appendix, we give details of the algorithm for reconstructing the Kähler moduli
space and testing the WGC. We discuss the residual gauge redundancy, as well as the
possible misidentifications of flops that can result from a computation of the GV invariants
of finitely many curves.

A.1

Identifying flop curves and stable Weyl reflections

We first describe how to identify flop curves given a Calabi-Yau obtained as a hypersurface
in a toric variety, together with the charges and associated GV invariants computed up
to a finite cutoff degree dcutoff using a grading vector ⃗vg (given by a suitable point in the
Kähler cone). We will denote by C the set of charges with nonzero GV invariants up to
this cutoff.
We start by creating a list N of curve classes that appear nilpotent based on a computation of GV invariants up to cutoff degree dcutoff . To do this, for each co-prime curve
class [C] we check if multiples of [C] have nonzero GV invariants, up to the cutoff dcutoff .
Given a charge [C], if there exists a positive integer multiple k ∗ such that
k ∗ [C] · ⃗vg ≤ dcutoff

and

n0k∗ [C] = 0 ,

(A.1)

Pk∗ −1 2 0
and k=1
k · nk[C] > 0, then the charge [C] is added to N.
Given the set of (apparently) nilpotent charges N and the set of (apparently) potent
charges C\N, we would like to determine the set F ⊆ N of nop curves. This is done in two
steps:

30

1. For each curve [C] ∈ N, determine whether [C] is on the boundary of the closure
of the cone generated by C\N. Intuitively, if [C] lies strictly outside of the cone
generated by C\N, the ray that passes through [C] diverges from all potent rays (and
even other nilpotent rays). In practice we will test for this feature in the following
non-unique way: we find the largest integer k such that k[C] lies on or below the
affine subspace defined by half the cutoff degree, i.e. k[C] · ⃗vg ≤ dcutoff /2. Then,
having determined k, we define a codimension one lattice by the intersection of the
affine subspace generated by all curves [C ′ ] with degree equal to k[C] · ⃗vg , declaring
k[C] as the new origin, and find a reduced lattice basis using LLL reduction [50].
In the lattice-reduced basis we compute d, defined as the smallest norm || · ||∞ of
all integer points that arise from rays in C\N. We use this quantity as an integer
notion of distance between the candidate nilpotent ray and the potent rays along a
slice through the Mori cone defined by half the cutoff degree. Then, we repeat this
process, similarly computing an integer distance d′ but with dcutoff /2 replaced by the
full cutoff degree dcutoff . If d′ > d, we conclude that, up to the chosen cutoff degree,
the ray passing through [C] diverges from the potent rays and is thus a candidate
nop curve. We add it to a list of candidate nop curves, F0 .
2. Assuming that all curves strictly interior to M∞ with sufficiently large degree are
in fact potent, step (1) will reliably identify all nop curves of sufficiently low degree.
However, one frequently finds examples where regions inside M∞ are not populated
by potent rays (see e.g. the GV invariants in Table 4 of our example §C.3). In order
to deal with this we repeat step (1) for all the candidate nop curves in F0 with the
following difference: in computing the pair (d, d′ ) we take the norm of all integer
points that arise from rays in the convex cone generated by the complement C\F0 ,
as opposed to just the potent rays. All curves in F0 that still appear to diverge from
the potent rays via this notion of distance are added to the list F, and treated as nop
curves.
It is not hard to convince oneself that for every nop curve there exists a finite cutoff degree
such that the above algorithm will find the nop curve. Similarly, every nilpotent ray on
the boundary of M∞ will be rejected for sufficiently large cutoff. Conversely, for any fixed
cutoff dcutoff one may over or underestimate the true set of nop curves, a subtlety which
we discuss in more detail in §A.3.

31

A.2

Gauge equivalence and isomorphisms

The set F is the set of curves that can be flopped in some phase to reconstruct the hyperextended Kähler cone, Khyp . Many (sometimes infinitely many—see [29]) chambers of Khyp
are redundant, either because of gauge symmetries or topological isomorphisms between
the Calabi-Yaus. In practice, we construct a less redundant subset of the hyperextended
Kähler cone, K◦ ⊆ Khyp , by identifying the curves in F that, when flopped, produce Weylsymmetric or isomorphic phases. To this end, given a particular Calabi-Yau X and the
generators of MGV
X , we perform the following test:
1. For each MGV
X generator [C] ∈ F, one tests whether there exists a non-vanishing
d⃗ ∈ H 1,1 (X, Z), such that κabc da tb tc ≡ 0 along the dual facet of KX . If not, the
facet where [C] shrinks marks a flop transition, and one computes the transformed
geometrical data κ′abc , c′a and GV invariants of a new Calabi-Yau X ′ using (3.8) and
(3.9), and adjoins a new geometrical chamber equal to the dual of MGV
X′ .
2. If, on the other hand, there exists a d⃗ such that κabc da tb tc ≡ 0 along the dual facet
of KX , one computes the map w of (3.1), and tests whether κmnl wm a wn b wl c is equal
to κ′abc computed from (3.8). If so, one has proven that the newly encountered geometrical chamber is gauge-equivalent to the original one, either via a Weyl reflection
or via a flop transition between two diffeomorphic Calabi-Yau’s, and can thus be
omitted. Otherwise, one records the new phase X ′ , and adjoins a new geometrical
chamber equal to the dual of MGV
X′ .
For every geometric chamber thus obtained one reruns the above algorithm, and further
omits geometric chambers that have previously been generated. Finally, one quotients the
result by whatever subgroup of the symmetry group of the birational equivalence class [X]b
one has access to.
Three kinds of gauge-redundancies remain in K◦ :
• N = 4 Weyl reflections.
• neighboring phases X and X ′ may still be diffeomorphic if the basis change of
H 2 (X, Z) needed to make the equivalence of triple intersection numbers and second Chern class manifest, is not equal to a simple reflection across their joined facet
of Kähler cones.
• non-neighboring X and X ′ may be diffeomorphic, but not related to each other by a
known symmetry of [X]b .
32

A.3

Limitations of a finite cutoff

In applying a computation of the GV invariants up to a finite degree d to characterize a
(0)
ray r, several misidentifications are possible. For each possible error we denote by Thyp the
resulting approximation to the true Thyp . The relevant possibilities are:
1. A ray r is effective and in M∞ but is misidentified as being non-effective, because
(0)
the first nonzero GV invariant along r has degree > d. In this case Thyp ⊋ Thyp .
2. A ray r is potent but is misidentified as being nilpotent and containing a nop curve,
because the infinite series of nonzero GV invariants begins at degree > d. In this
(0)
case Thyp ⊋ Thyp .
3. A ray r is nilpotent and on the boundary of M∞ but is misidentified as containing
(0)
a nop curve. In this case Thyp ⊋ Thyp .
4. A ray r is nilpotent and contains a nop curve but is misidentified as being potent,
(0)
because the GV invariants are nonzero up to degree d. In this case Thyp ⊊ Thyp .
5. A ray r is nilpotent and contains a nop curve but is misidentified as being on the
(0)
boundary of M∞ . In this case Thyp ⊊ Thyp .
In practice, by repeating our computation with ever-increasing d, we have reduced the
incidence of each of these errors.

A.4

Checking the lattice WGC up to a finite cutoff

Given the set C of charges with nonzero GV invariants, the set F of nilpotent curves outside
of M∞ , and all of their associated GV invariants, we can reconstruct an approximation
(0)
K◦ to the cone K◦ using the methods described in §A.1 and §A.2. We then construct
(0)
(0)
(0) 
T◦ := T (K◦ ). To check the lattice WGC, we compute points in Conv T◦
subject to
the condition
p⃗ · ⃗vg ≤ dcutoff .

(A.2)

Here, as defined above, ⃗vg is the grading vector and dcutoff is the chosen cutoff degree. We
then compute the GV invariant for each curve class p⃗. If all such GV invariants are nonzero,
(0)
(0)
we conclude that the lattice WGC is satisfied in T◦ up to the cutoff dcutoff . Because T◦
33

is a fundamental domain for Thyp under (a subgroup of) the automorphism group, we can
thereby conclude that the lattice WGC is satisfied in all of Thyp up to the specified cutoff.23

B

Toric Technology and Notation

In this appendix, we review some of the necessary technology that underlies both our
general scans as well as the examples discussed in §3.5 and Appendix C, simultaneously
setting notation for these examples.
Following Batyrev [51], we describe Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in simplicial toric fourfolds, constructed in the following standard way from the four-dimensional reflexive polytopes classified by Kreuzer and Skarke [48]. The cones over the faces of a reflexive polytope
∆◦ ⊂ Z4 define a toric fan of a singular toric variety. A fine, regular and star triangulation
(FRST) T of ∆◦ defines a desingularized toric fourfold V∆◦ ,T with toric fan assembled from
the cones over the simplices of T. The generic anticanonical hypersurface X∆◦ ,T is smooth
and Calabi-Yau. The toric divisors associated with points strictly interior to facets do not
intersect X∆◦ ,T , and thus we will in practice be concerned with triangulations that ignore
such points. Thus, each integer point p ∈ ∆◦ not interior to a facet and other than the
origin defines a generator of the Cox ring xp of homogeneous coordinates, and we may
1,1
index the generators as {xI }hI=1+4 with h1,1 ≡ h1,1 (V∆◦ ,T ), and likewise for the points pI .
The linear relations among the pI define the toric C∗ -scaling weights of the homogeneous
coordinates xI , conveniently organized in a GLSM charge matrix Qa I whose rows are a
Z-basis of linear relations,
X

Q a I pI = 0 ,

a = 1, . . . , h1,1 .

(B.1)

I

We have
[x1 : . . . : xh1,1 +4 ] =

"h1,1
Y
a=1

1,1

Qa

λ a 1 x1 : . . . :

h
Y

Qa 1,1
λa h +4 xh1,1 +4

a=1

#
,

1,1

∀λ ∈ (C∗ )h

,

(B.2)

parameterizing the part of the group of toric scaling relations Gtoric that is continuously
P
connected to the identity. The full Gtoric consists of η I such that I η I pI ∈ Z4 , leading to
23

(0)

Note that if T◦ is not convex then we may have
 actually checked a region that is somewhat larger
than Thyp , but not necessarily as large as Conv Thyp , since the union of the convex hulls of a set of regions
is sometimes smaller than the convex hull of the union of the regions.

34

equivalence relations
1

[x1 : . . . : xh1,1 +4 ] = [e2πiη x1 : . . . : e2πiη

h1,1 +4

xh1,1 +4 ] .

(B.3)

We will denote the toric divisors of the toric fourfold by D̂I := {xI = 0} ⊂ V∆◦ ,T , and the
prime toric divisors of the Calabi-Yau threefold DI := D̂I ∩ X∆◦ ,T . The D̂I generate the
divisor lattice H 2 (V∆◦ ,T , Z), as well as the cone of effective divisors E(V∆◦ ,T ). A choice of
Qa I is equivalent to a choice of basis of curve classes in H2 (V∆◦ ,T , Z) whose intersection
pairing with the toric divisors D̂I are the rows of the GLSM charge matrix, and we will
specify a basis of curve classes in this manner. We will fix the basis of divisor classes to
be its dual. Cones in T are in one-to-one correspondence with torus-invariant subvarieties
equal to the simultaneous vanishing of the homogeneous coordinates associated with onedimensional sub-cones. All subsets of homogeneous coordinates not associated with a cone
in T in this way generate the Stanley-Reisner (SR) ideal.
All our examples will be favorable in the sense that the natural inclusion H2 (X∆◦ ,T , Z) ,→
H2 (V∆◦ ,T , Z) is an isomorphism. The basis of curve and divisor classes in X∆◦ ,T will be
the one induced from this isomorphism. We note that different FRSTs of ∆◦ lead to
Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in the same birational equivalence class. If a pair of FRSTs have
equivalent induced triangulations on all two-faces of ∆◦ , the corresponding Calabi-Yau hypersurface remains smooth as one transitions from one FRST to the other. We will make
∪
defined as the union over all Kähler cones of ambient varieties V∆◦ ,T obtained
use of KX
from the same polytope ∆◦ , but from distinct FRSTs T that agree on two-faces. We have
∪
KX
⊆ KX . Furthermore, we define M∩X ⊇ MX as its dual cone.
Finally, we will often drop the subscripts (∆◦ , T) and refer to the toric variety simply
as V and the Calabi-Yau hypersurface as X, when no confusion is likely to arise.

C

Examples

In this appendix we work out a few examples in detail that illuminate features we have
discussed abstractly in §3. Some of the required toric technology with our chosen notational
conventions can be found in Appendix B.

35

C.1

Additional constraints on CBH

First, we discuss some properties of the cone of BPS black holes CBH that will be relevant in the following examples. Although we placed several inner bounds on it, this cone
is generally hard to compute exactly for two reasons. Firstly, it may be generated by
non-spherically-symmetric solutions, which are difficult to construct explicitly. Secondly,
even upon restricting our attention to the cone of spherically symmetric BPS black holes
spherical
CBH
⊆ CBH , the resulting attractor flows can run into strongly-coupled CFT boundaries (see [1] for more information), which makes it difficult to determine whether a smooth
horizon exists or not.
In our main analysis, we have sidestepped these issues by only relying on the inclusion
Thyp ⊆ CBH in (2.27) when checking the lattice WGC. Here we will be more specific to
better understand the following examples.
At any given point in the moduli space Ta⋆ , the cone of BPS black holes CBH (Ta⋆ )
certainly includes the spherically symmetric solutions that can be explicitly constructed
using BPS attractor flows that avoid strongly-coupled CFT boundaries. This region is
precisely
explicit
CBH
(Ta⋆ ) = Vis(Ta⋆ ) ,
(C.1)
where Vis(Ta⋆ ) denotes the region of the Weyl-extended dual-coordinate moduli space that is
“visible” from Ta⋆ , i.e., that can be reached from Ta⋆ along a straight line in dual coordinates
without crossing any boundaries of the Weyl-extended moduli space. Note that Vis(Ta⋆ )
is not necessarily contained in Thyp , i.e., we can freely cross through unstable Weyl flops;
the low-energy effective field theory remains under control at these flops despite the wallcrossing phenomena that occur in the ultraviolet BPS spectrum.
explicit
Thus, since CBH
(Ta⋆ ) ⊆ CBH (Ta⋆ ), we can strengthen the inclusion (2.27) to
Vis(Thyp ) ⊆ CBH ,

(C.2)

S
where Vis(Thyp ) := Ta⋆ ∈Thyp Vis(Ta⋆ ).
Note that, as the fully Weyl-extended dual-coordinate moduli space is not in general
explicit
(Ta⋆ ) = Vis(Ta⋆ ) generically does depends on Ta⋆ . This does not contradict the
convex, CBH
explicit
conjecture (2.28), because the inclusion CBH
(Ta⋆ ) ⊆ CBH (Ta⋆ ) need not be strict. If there
are no CFT boundaries at codimension one in the dual-coordinate moduli space then we
spherical
explicit
can say a bit more. In this case, CBH
(Ta⋆ ) and CBH
(Ta⋆ ) are essentially the same—at
most up to a measure-zero set of points. If the fully Weyl-extended dual-coordinate moduli
36

space still fails to be convex, as occurs in the example discussed in §C.4, then for some Ta⋆ ,
spherical
spherical
:=
CBH
(Ta⋆ ) ⊊ CBH

[
Ta⋆ ∈Thyp

spherical
CBH
(Ta⋆ ) .

(C.3)

spherical
spherical
.
Given the existence of such examples, we conclude that in general CBH
(Ta⋆ ) ̸= CBH
This once again does not contradict (2.28) because the cone of BPS black holes may be
generated by solutions that are not spherically symmetric. However, settling this question
would require constructing all such solutions and characterizing their properties, a highly
non-trivial problem that we leave to future work.

C.2

An unstable Weyl flop with fully-determined CBH

We begin with a simple example that contains an unstable Weyl flop, but no CFT boundspherical
aries. As a consequence, there are no indeterminate flows and we can determine CBH
exactly: it turns out to be a strict subcone of the infinity cone, M∞ . Moreover, while we
lack the tools to check this explicitly, the general features of the computed GV invariants
spherical
suggest that CBH = CBH
in this example.
The geometry consists of a Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface with h1,1 = 2 in a toric
variety, constructed from an FRST of the reflexive polytope ∆◦ whose points other than
the origin are


−1 0 0 0 1 2


−1 0 0 1 0 0 


(C.4)
 0 0 1 0 0 −1 .


0 1 0 0 0 −1
A GLSM charge matrix is given by


x1 x2 x 3 x 4 x5 x6


 0 1 1 0 −2 1  .
1 0 0 1 1 0

(C.5)

The faces of ∆◦ are simplices, so no FRST needs to be specified.
In the GLSM basis, the Mori cone MV inherited from the toric ambient variety is
simply the first quadrant. The GV invariants of both generators are nonzero, and thus
MX = MV and the Kähler cone is given by KX = {t1 , t2 ≥ 0}. The geometry has no flop
transitions, so K = KX .
37

q2 0
q1
0
∗
−2
1
2
0
0
3
4
0
5
0
0
6
7
0
0
8

1
177
178
3
5
7
9
11
13
15

2
177
20291
−177
−708
−1068
−1448
−1880
−2412
−3122

3
186
317172
332040
44790
75225
110271
157734
231979
356005

4
177
2998628
73458379
794368
−4468169
−7157586
−11253268
−18701330
−32878062

5
177
21195310
3048964748
3122149716
243105088
396368217
676476353
1241479305
2432078638

6
186
123413576
67638465983
710345698242
54329854510
−27580928924
−48092153649
−87415077360
−172868371620

7
177
622393836
1034258133329
46445530268176
46884487081241
2382035587157
2530899579921
4793679740747
10041154974639

8
177
2806637500
12232084778113
1663087069097865
10524250865224651
1540781601550297
−241894701950815
−439028227820944
−797065258455869

Table 3: Genus zero GV invariants n0q1 ,q2 for the geometry of §C.2. Charges inside the
infinity cone M∞ = {q1 , q2 ≥ 0} but outside the cone of spherically-symmetric BPS black
spherical
spherical
holes CBH
= {q2 ≥ q1 ≥ 0} are marked in yellow, charges inside CBH
but outside
the cone of dual coordinates T = {q2 ≥ 2q1 ≥ 0} are shown in green, and charges inside
spherical
T are shown in pink. The absence of zeros within CBH
is consistent with the lattice
WGC.
The geometry in question has independent triple intersection numbers
κ111 = 0 ,

κ112 = 3 ,

κ122 = 7 ,

κ222 = 14 .

(C.6)

These triple intersection numbers lead to the five-dimensional prepotential
3
7
7
F = (t1 )2 t2 + t1 (t2 )2 + (t2 )3 .
2
2
3

(C.7)

The boundary t2 → 0 is an asymptotic boundary, which lies at infinite distance. The
boundary t1 = 0 is the locus of a genus zero Weyl reflection, where the toric divisor D6
shrinks to a P1 . The Weyl reflection acts on the Kähler coordinates as
w : t1 → −t1 ,

t2 → t2 + t1 .

(C.8)

Note that this Weyl reflection is unstable, and correspondingly there are no nop curves
in this geometry. Accordingly, the hyperextended Kähler cone is equal to the extended
Kähler cone, Khyp = K = KX .
The GV invariants for this geometry are shown in Table 3. The infinity cone M∞ is
∨
simply equal to the Mori cone, consistent with the relation M∞ = Khyp
.
The dual coordinates Ta are given by
7
T1 = 3t1 t2 + (t2 )2 ,
2

3
T2 = (t1 )2 + 7t1 t2 + 7(t2 )2 .
2
38

(C.9)

These parametrize the cone of dual coordinates,
T = {T2 ≥ 2T1 ≥ 0} ,

(C.10)

which is indeed dual to the effective cone, generated by the divisor classes [D5 ] and [D6 ].
Under the Weyl reflection, these coordinates transform as T1 → T2 − T1 , T2 → T2 , and
the cone of dual coordinates transforms to
w(T ) = {2T1 ≥ T2 ,

T2 ≥ T1 } .

(C.11)

Since the Weyl-extended dual-coordinate moduli space W(T ) = T ∪ w(T ) is (trivially)
convex, the cone of spherically-symmetric BPS black holes is simply
spherical
CBH
= Vis(Thyp ) = W(T ) = {T2 ≥ T1 ≥ 0} .

(C.12)

As can be seen in Table 3, all the GV invariants within this cone are nonzero up to the
degree calculated, in agreement with the lattice WGC.
Finally, we note that the genus zero GV invariants in Table 3 have different characterisspherical
tics inside and outside CBH
. For example, their sign strictly alternates by column outspherical
spherical
side CBH
, whereas they are mostly positive within CBH
. These and other patterns
spherical
suggest that different physics contributes inside and outside CBH
, which is perhaps
spherical
indicative that CBH
may be the full cone of BPS black holes CBH in this example.

C.3

SU (2) enhancement with fundamental matter

Our next example illustrates two new phenomena: (1) the su(2) gauge theory arising at a
Weyl flop can have massless, fundamentally charged matter and (2) even though it is typically finitely generated, the Weyl group need not be a finite group because different Weyl
flops need not commute (even in the absence of a higher-rank nonabelian enhancement).
We consider the toric variety V and its Calabi-Yau hypersurface X arising from the
four-dimensional reflexive polytope ∆◦ whose points not interior to facets and other than

39

the origin are the columns of



1 −3 0 −1 0 −2 0


0 1 0 −1 0 −1 1


0 −2 0 1 1 0 0 .


0 −1 1 0 0 0 0

(C.13)

A GLSM charge matrix is given by


x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7


 1 0 0 1 −1 0 1 


 1 0 0 −1 1 1 0  .


3 1 1 0
2 0 −1

(C.14)

Evidently, we have h1,1 = 3. All FRSTs of ∆◦ give are equivalent along two-faces. We
choose, arbitrarily, one such FRST, whose SR ideal is generated by the monomials
SR = ⟨x4 x7 , x1 x5 x6 , x1 x6 x7 , x2 x3 x4 , x2 x3 x5 ⟩ .

(C.15)

The independent triple intersection numbers κabc are
κ111 = κ112 = κ113 = κ123 = κ133 = κ222 = κ233 = 1
κ122 = κ223 = −1 ,

κ333 = 0 .

(C.16)

The GV invariants of the generators of M∩X are all non-vanishing and therefore MX = M∩X .
The generators, denoted {[C i ]}4i=1 ⊂ H2 (X, Z), expressed in the basis (C.14), are



1
0
0
1




[C 1 ] [C 2 ] [C 3 ] [C 4 ] = 0 1 0 −1 .
0 0 1 1

(C.17)

In other words, the Kähler cone is defined by ta > 0, a = 1, 2, 3, and t1 − t2 + t3 >
0. The two-faces of the Mori cone are generated by the pairs ([C i ], [C j ]) with (i, j) ∈
{(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4), (4, 1)}.
For suitable choice of defining polynomial and Kähler class, the Calabi-Yau X has a

40

Z2 symmetry acting as

s2 : H2 (X, Z) → H2 (X, Z) :

[C] 7→ Λ · [C] ,



0 1 1


Λ := 1 0 −1 ,
0 0 1

(C.18)

which interchanges [C 1 ] ↔ [C 2 ] and [C 3 ] ↔ [C 4 ].
In the limit t1 → 0 the curve C1 shrinks to a point, and the prime toric divisor D5 shrinks
linearly in t1 , i.e. D5 degenerates to a curve. Indeed, D5 is a non-trivial P1 fibration over
P1 and in the above limit the fiber, in the class 2[C 1 ] ∈ H2 (X, Z), shrinks. To see this one
notes that the generic anticanonical polynomial f in V can be written, up to overall scale,
as
f =x21 + x26 x27
+ x36 x7 x4
+ x46 x24

4
X
i=0
3
X

i=0
3
X
i=0

g8−2i [x2 : x3 ] · (x4 x5 )i
i

k7−2i [x2 : x3 ] · (x4 x5 )

+ x6 x37 x5

m6−2i [x2 : x3 ] · (x4 x5 )i + x47 x25

3
X
i=0

3
X
i=0

l7−2i [x2 : x3 ] · (x4 x5 )i

n6−2i [x2 : x3 ] · (x4 x5 )i ,

(C.19)

where {gi , ki , li , mi , ni } are generic homogeneous degree i polynomials in (x2 , x3 ). Therefore, we have
f |x5 =0 = x21 + g8 [x2 : x3 ]x26 x27 + k7 [x2 : x3 ]x4 x36 x7 + m6 [x2 : x3 ]x24 x26 .

(C.20)

Along D5 , without loss we may assume x6 ̸= 0, and can thus gauge fix x6 = 1.24 The
remaining scaling relations are then summarized in a conveniently reordered charge matrix


x2 x3 x1 x4 x7


0 0 1 1 1  ,
1 1 3 0 −1

(C.21)

associated with the three-dimensional toric variety D̂5 .
We can therefore view the divisor D5 as a hypersurface in the toric threefold D̂5 . One
24

Setting x6 = 0 along D5 , the vanishing of f |x5 =x6 would enforce that x1 = 0. But the monomial
x1 x5 x6 is in the Stanley-Reisner ideal of V and thus x6 ̸= 0 along D5 .

41

immediately sees that D̂5 is a P2 fibration over P1 :
P2f ,→ D̂5 ↠ P1b ,

(C.22)

and the polynomial (C.20) defines a quadratic hypersurface in P2f , i.e. a P1 in the class
2[H] where [H] is the hyperplane class of the fiber, over each point of P1b parameterized by
the projective coordinates [x2 : x3 ]. Therefore, the divisor D5 is a P1 fibration over P1 ,
P2f ⊃ P12[H] ,→ D5 ↠ P1b ,

(C.23)

which degenerates over all points in the base along which the discriminant
∆f := 4m6 g8 − (k7 )2

(C.24)

vanishes. For generic choice of {g8 , k7 , m6 } the P12[H] fiber thus degenerates to the union of
two P1 ’s, each in the hyperplane class [H] of P2f , over 14 points in the base P1 , thus totaling
28 isolated rigid P1 ’s.
The generic P1 fiber is obtained by intersecting D5 with a generic representative of the
class [D2 ] = [D3 ]. By intersecting with a basis of divisors, one computes that it is in the
homology class 2[C 1 ] ∈ H2 (X, Z). Its curve moduli space M2[C 1 ] is equal to the base of the
P1 fibration (C.23), and thus its GV invariant is
n02[C 1 ] = (−1)dim(M2[C1 ] ) χ(M2[C 1 ] ) = −2 .

(C.25)

As in [32,33], M2-branes wrapped on the P1 fiber become massless W-bosons in the singular
limit, and the gauge group enhances an SU (2) factor. The presence of 28 isolated P1 ’s in
the class [C 1 ] on the other hand implies that
n0[C 1 ] = 28 ,

(C.26)

and in the singular limit M2-branes wrapped on these curves lead to 28 massless hypermultiplets with half the Cartan-U (1) charge of the W-bosons, which therefore must organize
into 14 hypermultiplets in the fundamental representation of the gauge group SU (2). This
direct prediction for the GV invariants is confirmed by an independent systematic computation of GV invariants using mirror symmetry [2, 3, 5], see Table 4.
As usual, their contribution to the prepotential of the type IIA compactification has a
42

logarithmic branch cut starting at the singular locus Z := [C 1 ]a z a = z 1 = 0,
F IIA ⊃ −

 1 2
1
log(1/Z)
2πiZ
4πiZ
28
Li
(e
)
−
2
Li
(e
)
≃ Z (28 − 4 × 2)
+ hol. , (C.27)
3
3
3
(2πi)
2
(2πi)

leading to running of the U (1) gauge coupling
a

τU (1) = ∂Z [D5 ] ∂a F

IIA



i
=−
× 2bYM × log
2π



ΛL
Z



2πi

τ

+ O(Z/MP ) ,

(C.28)

with
8π 2
= 2Nc − NF = −10 ,
bYM := µ∂µ 2
gYM (µ)

ΛL := µUV e bYM YM

(µUV )

,

τYM (µUV ) = z 2 ,

(C.29)
with UV matching scale µUV := MP e , where K is defined in (2.6) and Z := −2πiµUV Z.
Here, Nc = 2 is the dual Coxeter number of the gauge group SU (2), NF = 14 is the
number of adjoint hypermultiplets, ΛL is the Landau pole of the IR-free gauge theory, and
ℓ5 · τYM (µUV ) is the classical gauge coupling of the five-dimensional theory as a function of
the remaining Kähler parameters.
The Weyl group associated with the SU (2) gauge group is generated by
K
2



w : H2 (X, Z) → H2 (X, Z) ,


−1 2 4


[C] →
7  0 1 0 · [C] ,
0 0 1

(C.30)

but the GV invariants turn out to not be invariant under this Weyl group action (cf. Table
4), implying a non-trivial wall-crossing phenomenon at the origin of the Coulomb branch.
The physics described above of course applies equally well to the codimension-one facet
of the Kähler cone where the curve C 2 shrinks, via the symmetry (C.18). As the curve
classes ([C 1 ], [C 2 ]) span a two-face of the Mori cone, one might expect that the simultaneous
shrinking of these two curves leads to higher rank non-abelian enhancement. This, however,
is not so: the diagonal limit (t1 , t2 ) → 0 lies at infinite distance in moduli space, where X
degenerates into a complex surface. We further note that passing through Weyl reflections
associated with the shrinking curves C 1 and C 2 in alternating order, one obtains the infinite-

43

T3
T1+T2 +T3

t3
t +t 3
1

1

1

0

1

t2
t +t 3
1

0

1

T1
T1+T2 +T3

Figure 7: Left: Two-dimensional cross-section of the Weyl-group orbit of the Kähler
cone. Interior lines mark Weyl-reflection loci, while exterior walls mark the CFT limits. Right: Two-dimensional cross-section of the Weyl-group orbit of the cone of movable
curves (black), embedded into the Mori cone (pink). Again, Weyl-reflection loci are marked
by white lines. The lower two vertices are the curves that shrink to give rise to su(2) enhancements while the upper two correspond to the CFT limits.
order Weyl group W generated by


w′ := s2 ◦ w : H2 (X, Z) → H2 (X, Z) ,


0 1 1


[C] →
7 −1 2 3 · [C] .
0 0 1

(C.31)

The Weyl orbit of the Kähler cone is an infinitely generated convex cone, and the Weyl orbit
of the cone of movable curves is likewise an infinitely generated convex sub-cone of the Mori
cone (see Figure 7). All Weyl-group images of the Kähler cone intersect at an accumulation
point, which is the aforementioned intersection of both non-abelian enhancement loci, lying
at infinite distance in the moduli space.
Along the other two facets of the Kähler cone the prime toric divisors D6 and D7 shrink
to points, so the low energy physics is a strongly coupled tensionless string CFT in the
five-dimensional theory.
Absent any flop transitions, we have K ≡ KX and the effective cone is generated by the
(rigid) prime toric divisors {D4 , D5 , D6 , D7 }. Its dual, the cone of movable curves Mov,
44

q3 = 0
q3 = 1
q2
−2
q1
0
−
1
−
2
−9252
3
0
4
0
5
0
6
0

−1
−
0
143640
1005480
143640
0
0

q3 = 4

0
252
26144
161240
34336
−16132
24576
−32768

1
28
196
28
0
0
0
0

1
0
161240
3389568
11865384
3618944
−297512
688128

2
0
34336
11865384
144023712
379678864
147415200
5082408

0
−9252
143640
107389712
1982306472
6785861560
2202638504
−365781232

2
−2
28
176
28
−2
0
0

1
0
1005480
1982306472
74208835520
669904166680
1684741323120
699283955480

q2
−3
q1
0
−
1
−
2
−
3
848628
4
0
5
0

−2
−
−
0
−18865280
−132056960
−18865280

−1
−
0
0
1000128720
19800596480
69523670960

q2
−4
q1
0
−
1
−
2
−
3
−
4
−114265008
5
0

−3
−
−
−
0
3226808340
22587658380

−2
−
−
0
0
−149516774740
−2854273434600

q3 = 3

q3 = 2

q2 −1
q1
0
−
1
252
2
0
3
0
0
4
5
0
6
0

q2 0
q1
0
∗
1
28
−2
2
3
0
4
0
0
5
6
0

3
0
0
28
196
28
0
0

4
0
0
−2
28
176
28
−2

5
0
0
0
0
28
196
28

3
0
−16132
3618944
379678864
3340910720
7490806028
3376234624

4
0
24576
−297512
147415200
7490806028
52954926336
107008961736

2
0
143640
6785861560
669904166680
13132156970304
82543157015248
172178353335592

0
848628
−18865280
1000128720
1155156240800
37248393860088
317060747387520

6
0
0
0
0
−2
28
176

3
0
0
2202638504
1684741323120
82543157015248
1115085309377792
5538585837897800

1
0
−132056960
19800596480
37248393860088
1975319069667328
30784544966451680

−1
−
0
0
5158112400
12435686082500
427372552969920

5
0
−32768
688128
5082408
3376234624
107008961736
643290939648

4
0
0
−365781232
699283955480
172178353335592
5538585837897800
57882723471476816

2
0
−18865280
69523670960
317060747387520
30784544966451680
832309647138723328

0
−114265008
3226808340
−149516774740
12435686082500
18251242470992832
850602661974296708

1
0
22587658380
−2854273434600
427372552969920
850602661974296708
58131312791048887904

Table 4: Genus zero GV invariants n0q1 ,q2 ,q3 for the geometry of Appendix C.3. The sites
labeled “−” lie outside the (non-simplicial) Mori cone. The infinity cone is equal to the
Mori cone and is marked in yellow. The cone T is marked in pink and its images under
w′ and w′−1 of eq. (C.31) are marked in green (higher order images do not have integer
sites in their interior that fall into the displayed window). Together, the pink and green
sites denote the largest region Vis(Thyp ) where BPS black holes are known to exist. These
charges are fully populated by non-vanishing GV-invariants, in agreement with the lattice
WGC.

45

turns out to be fully populated by non-vanishing genus zero GV invariants, as predicted
by the lattice WGC, and is indeed equal to the cone of dual coordinates T .
The hyperextended Kähler cone Khyp is also equal to K, as all loci of su(2) enhancement
are unstable. Therefore, by our discussion in §3, the infinity cone M∞ should be equal to
the entire Mori cone. This indeed appears to be borne out in this example: the sequence
of GV invariants associated with either of the two CFT limits is
ng(0,0,k) = {252, −9252, 848628, −114265008, 18958064400, −3589587111852,
744530011302420, −165076694998001856, 38512679141944848024,
−9353163584375938364400, 2346467355966572489025540, . . .} ,

(C.32)

and does not appear to terminate. Likewise, adding arbitrary multiples of one of the
generators that shrinks at an su(2)-enhancement locus to a suitable curve class gives rise
to a sequence of GV invariants that appears infinite, e.g.:
n(1,2,1)+k·(1,0,0) = {34336, 11865384, 144023712, 379678864, 147415200, 5082408, 10208800,
−13565952, 16957440, −20348928, 23740416, −27131904, 30523392,
−33914880, 37306368, −40697856, 44089344, −47480832, . . .} .

(C.33)

Finally, despite the presence of walls of marginal stability along the Weyl-reflection
loci in moduli space, the entire Weyl-orbit W(T ) of the cone of dual coordinates is fully
populated by non-vanishing GV invariants, see Table 4. Because this region is convex
in the present example, this is precisely Vis(Thyp ), so the absence of any vanishing GV
invariants within this larger cone provides a more stringent test of the lattice WGC.

C.4

Monodromy in the Weyl-extended moduli space

Our final example involves yet another new feature: branch cuts and monodromy in the
fully Weyl-extended moduli space. This example has two Weyl flops, one stable and one
unstable, with a CFT boundary at their codimension-two intersection. Upon passing
through the two Weyl flops alternately in sequence, one discovers that the CFT point is a
branch point for the fully Weyl-extended moduli space, with a monodromy in the central
charges as one moves around this branch point. This monodromy is not visible when one
restricts attention to the hyperextended moduli space Thyp (avoiding the unstable Weyl
flop). Indeed, since Khyp = M∨hyp is convex, the T map is invertible throughout Khyp ,
46

forbidding such a monodromy.
Let us consider the h1,1 = 3 Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface constructed from an
FRST of the reflexive polytope ∆◦ whose points not interior to facets, excluding the origin,
are the columns of


−9 0 0 1 1 −4 −2


−5 0 1 0 1 −2 −1


(C.34)
−3 1 0 0 1 −1 0  .


−2 0 0 0 2 0
0
A GLSM charge matrix is given by


x1 x2 x3 x4 x 5 x6 x7


 1 0 0 0 1 −2 0 


 0 1 0 0 0 1 −2 .


0 0 1 2 0 0
1

(C.35)

All FRSTs of ∆◦ are equivalent along two-faces, so without loss we can choose a single
arbitrary FRST of ∆◦ . The cone M∩X is the first octant in the basis (C.35).
Our geometry has nonzero independent triple intersection numbers
κ123 = 1 ,

κ223 = κ133 = 2 ,

κ233 = 4 ,

κ333 = 8 ,

(C.36)

while the rest vanish. These triple intersection numbers lead to the 5d prepotential
F = t1 t2 t3 + (t2 )2 t3 + t1 (t3 )2 + 2t2 (t3 )2 + 4(t3 )3 /3 .

(C.37)

In the limit t3 → 0 the Calabi-Yau volume vanishes, so this limit corresponds to a facet of
the Kähler cone that lies at infinite distance in moduli space. At t1 = 0 the prime toric
divisor D6 shrinks to a curve of genus one, while as t2 = 0 the prime toric divisor D7
shrinks to a curve of genus zero.25 Along each of these latter two boundaries, there is an
su(2) enhancement of the gauge symmetry, and there is a Weyl reflection of the moduli
space through the boundary. Thus, the Mori cone is simplicial and its generators coincide
with our choice of basis.
25

One sees this from the data of the polytope as follows: the prime toric divisors D6,7 are associated to
points interior to one-faces of ∆◦ . Their P1 fibers — the curves that shrink at the respective facets of the
Kähler cone — are associated to edges of the triangulation interior to two-faces that end in the respective
one-face points. The genera of the curves they degenerate to are equal to the genera of the one-faces,
defined as the number of points interior to the dual two-faces of the dual polytope.

47

The genus one Weyl reflection is given by
w1 : t1 → −t1 ,

t2 → t2 + t1 ,

t3 → t3 ,

(C.38)

under which the prepotential in (C.37) is invariant. Relatedly, the genus zero GV invariant
n01,0,0 vanishes due to a cancelation between hypermultiplets and vector multiplets, which
become massless at the wall t1 = 0.
Meanwhile, under the genus zero Weyl reflection,
w2 : t1 → t1 , t2 → −t2 , t3 → t3 + t2 ,

(C.39)

the prepotential shifts as F → F + (t2 )3 /3. The corresponding shift κ222 → κ222 + 2 can be
read off from the GV invariant n00,1,0 = −2, which tells us that a charged vector multiplet
(and no hypermultiplets) becomes massless at t2 = 0, as expected for a genus zero Weyl
reflection.
This geometry has no flop transitions, so the extended Kähler cone K is given simply
by KX .
The dual coordinates are given by Ta := 21 κabc tb tc , so by (C.36) they take the form
T1 = t2 t3 +(t3 )2 , T2 = t1 t3 +2t2 t3 +2(t3 )2 , T3 = t1 t2 +(t2 )2 +2t1 t3 +4t2 t3 +4(t3 )2 . (C.40)
These parametrize the cone of dual coordinates,
T = {T1 ≥ 0 ,

T2 ≥ 2T1 ,

T3 ≥ 2T2 } .

(C.41)

As expected, T is contained in the Mori cone, MX , which is by definition the dual of the
Kähler cone:
∨
MX = K X
= {T1 , T2 , T3 ≥ 0} .
(C.42)
Meanwhile, the effective cone is

E = T ∨ = t1 + 2t2 + 4t3 ≥ 0 , t2 + 2t3 ≥ 0 , t3 ≥ 0 ,

(C.43)

and in this case is generated by the prime toric divisors {D1 , D6 , D7 }.
The only nop curve class is the one of charge qa = (1, 0, 0), which shrinks to zero size at
the boundary of the Kähler cone associated with the genus one Weyl reflection. By (C.38),

48

<latexit sha1_base64="DbJ6HHQbTRK9wv3hJNsq0xz8VmA=">AAACBHicbVC7TsMwFL3hWcqrwMhiUSF1KkmpgLESC2OR+pLaKHJcp7XqOJHtIFVRV3ZW+AU2xMp/8Ad8Bk6bgbYcydLROffl48ecKW3b39bG5tb2zm5hr7h/cHh0XDo57agokYS2ScQj2fOxopwJ2tZMc9qLJcWhz2nXn9xnfveJSsUi0dLTmLohHgkWMIK1kbotr3bV8q69Utmu2nOgdeLkpAw5ml7pZzCMSBJSoQnHSvUdO9ZuiqVmhNNZcZAoGmMywSPaN1TgkCo3nZ87Q5dGGaIgkuYJjebq344Uh0pNQ99UhliP1aqXif95/UQHd27KRJxoKshiUZBwpCOU/R0NmaRE86khmEhmbkVkjCUm2iRUXFqTDZcqUDMTjbMaxDrp1KrOTbX+WC83KnlIBTiHC6iAA7fQgAdoQhsITOAFXuHNerberQ/rc1G6YeU9Z7AE6+sXwveYDA==</latexit>

T2 /T3
<latexit
sha1_base64="P2ZtbaLJTbAICgNGAa7Ug3lHliw=">AAACCnicbVDLSsNAFL2pr1pfVZduBosgCCWpRd0IBTcuK6QPaEOYTCft0MnDmYlQQv/AvVv9BXfi1p/wD/wMJ20WtvXAhcM598XxYs6kMs1vo7C2vrG5Vdwu7ezu7R+UD4/aMkoEoS0S8Uh0PSwpZyFtKaY47caC4sDjtOON7zK/80SFZFFoq0lMnQAPQ+YzgpWWHNu9RLfIdq0L26255YpZNWdAq8TKSQVyNN3yT38QkSSgoSIcS9mzzFg5KRaKEU6npX4iaYzJGA9pT9MQB1Q66ezpKTrTygD5kdAVKjRT/06kOJByEni6M8BqJJe9TPzP6yXKv3FSFsaJoiGZH/ITjlSEsgTQgAlKFJ9ogolg+ldERlhgonROpYUz2XIhfTnV0VjLQaySdq1qXVXrD/VKA+UhFeEETuEcLLiGBtxDE1pA4BFe4BXejGfj3fgwPuetBSOfOYYFGF+/28uZnQ==</latexit>

T3

T1

=
T1

T3

sha1_base64="9nDY+yhD0mkqQMomOQpmRvEngKs=">AAACEHicbVDLTsJAFL3FF+Kr6NLNRGLiRtIiUTcmJG5cYgJIAk0zHaYwYfrIzFRDGn7CvVv9BXfGrX/gH/gZTqELAU8yk5Nz7ivHizmTyrK+jcLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39glg87MkoEoW0S8Uh0PSwpZyFtK6Y47caC4sDj9MEb32b+wyMVkkVhS01i6gR4GDKfEay05JrllnuBblANtdwaOte/7ZoVq2rNgFaJnZMK5Gi65k9/EJEkoKEiHEvZs61YOSkWihFOp6V+ImmMyRgPaU/TEAdUOuns9Ck61coA+ZHQL1Ropv7tSHEg5STwdGWA1Ugue5n4n9dLlH/tpCyME0VDMl/kJxypCGU5oAETlCg+0QQTwfStiIywwETptEoLa7LhQvpyqqOxl4NYJZ1a1b6s1u/rlQbKQyrCMZzAGdhwBQ24gya0gcATvMArvBnPxrvxYXzOSwtG3nMECzC+fgHjg5qK</latexit>
<latexit

1

T
=
2

sha1_base64="cnO6dZk3Ou2qf5EzilCrQw6tyHk=">AAACBnicbVDLSsNAFL2pr1pfVZduBovgqiSlqBuh4MZlhb6kDWEynbRDJ5MwMxFK6N69W/0Fd+LW3/AP/AwnbRa29cDA4Zz7muPHnClt299WYWNza3unuFva2z84PCofn3RUlEhC2yTikez5WFHOBG1rpjntxZLi0Oe060/uMr/7RKVikWjpaUzdEI8ECxjB2kiPLa+GblHLc7xyxa7ac6B14uSkAjmaXvlnMIxIElKhCcdK9R071m6KpWaE01lpkCgaYzLBI9o3VOCQKjedHzxDF0YZoiCS5gmN5urfjhSHSk1D31SGWI/VqpeJ/3n9RAc3bspEnGgqyGJRkHCkI5T9Hg2ZpETzqSGYSGZuRWSMJSbaZFRaWpMNlypQMxONsxrEOunUqs5Vtf5QrzRQHlIRzuAcLsGBa2jAPTShDQRCeIFXeLOerXfrw/pclBasvOcUlmB9/QKHlZhk</latexit>

T

sha1_base64="819mMOk1f9H/L2FXg4RRxHu9zxg=">AAACBnicbVC7TsMwFL3hWcqrwILEYlEhMVVJVQFjJRbGItEHaqPIcZ3Wqp1EtkNVRd3ZWeEX2BArv8Ef8Bk4bQbaciRbR+fc63t9/JgzpW3721pb39jc2i7sFHf39g8OS0fHLRUlktAmiXgkOz5WlLOQNjXTnHZiSbHwOW37o9vMbz9RqVgUPuhJTF2BByELGMHaSI9jzxl7VXN7pbJdsWdAq8TJSRlyNLzST68fkUTQUBOOleo6dqzdFEvNCKfTYi9RNMZkhAe0a2iIBVVuOlt4ii6M0kdBJM0JNZqpfztSLJSaCN9UCqyHatnLxP+8bqKDGzdlYZxoGpL5oCDhSEco+z3qM0mJ5hNDMJHM7IrIEEtMtMmouDAme1yqQE1NNM5yEKukVa04V5Xafa1cP81DKsAZnMMlOHANdbiDBjSBgIAXeIU369l6tz6sz3npmpX3nMACrK9f1iWZLA==</latexit>

<latexit

<latexit

w2

w

<latexit sha1_base64="xvK/ZojDkpkDXNNhJGk1v5B9VRM=">AAACAHicbVDLSsNAFL2pr1pfVTeCm8EiuCpJKeqy4MZlRfuANpTJdNIOnUzCzEQJoRv3bvUX3Ilb/8Q/8DOctFnY1gMDh3Pua44Xcaa0bX9bhbX1jc2t4nZpZ3dv/6B8eNRWYSwJbZGQh7LrYUU5E7Slmea0G0mKA4/Tjje5yfzOI5WKheJBJxF1AzwSzGcEayPdPw1qg3LFrtozoFXi5KQCOZqD8k9/GJI4oEITjpXqOXak3RRLzQin01I/VjTCZIJHtGeowAFVbjo7dYrOjTJEfijNExrN1L8dKQ6USgLPVAZYj9Wyl4n/eb1Y+9duykQUayrIfJEfc6RDlP0bDZmkRPPEEEwkM7ciMsYSE23SKS2syYZL5aupicZZDmKVtGtV57Jav6tXGid5SEU4hTO4AAeuoAG30IQWEBjBC7zCm/VsvVsf1ue8tGDlPcewAOvrF6GPluI=</latexit>

1w
2w
1

<latexit sha1_base64="oSYXXLFIOBoTCvT9LEExz7AgIBU=">AAACBHicbVDLSgMxFL1TX7W+qi7dBIvgqsxIUTdCwY3LCn1BO5RMmmlDk8yQZIQydOverf6CO3Hrf/gHfoaZdha29UDgcM595QQxZ9q47rdT2Njc2t4p7pb29g8Oj8rHJ20dJYrQFol4pLoB1pQzSVuGGU67saJYBJx2gsl95neeqNIskk0zjakv8EiykBFsrNRpDjx0h9xBueJW3TnQOvFyUoEcjUH5pz+MSCKoNIRjrXueGxs/xcowwums1E80jTGZ4BHtWSqxoNpP5+fO0IVVhiiMlH3SoLn6tyPFQuupCGylwGasV71M/M/rJSa89VMm48RQSRaLwoQjE6Hs72jIFCWGTy3BRDF7KyJjrDAxNqHS0ppsuNKhntlovNUg1kn7qupdV2uPtUod5SEV4QzO4RI8uIE6PEADWkBgAi/wCm/Os/PufDifi9KCk/ecwhKcr18Xx5eb</latexit>

w2 w1 w2

T2

T1 = 0

+

<latexit sha1_base64="BzrkU0tMJteXcCZk1Nf0bM0pvfY=">AAACBnicbVC7TsMwFL3hWcqrwILEYlEhMVVJVQFjJRbGItEHaqPIcZ3Wqp1EtkNVRd3ZWeEX2BArv8Ef8Bk4bQbaciRbR+fc63t9/JgzpW3721pb39jc2i7sFHf39g8OS0fHLRUlktAmiXgkOz5WlLOQNjXTnHZiSbHwOW37o9vMbz9RqVgUPuhJTF2BByELGMHaSI9jrzr2HHN7pbJdsWdAq8TJSRlyNLzST68fkUTQUBOOleo6dqzdFEvNCKfTYi9RNMZkhAe0a2iIBVVuOlt4ii6M0kdBJM0JNZqpfztSLJSaCN9UCqyHatnLxP+8bqKDGzdlYZxoGpL5oCDhSEco+z3qM0mJ5hNDMJHM7IrIEEtMtMmouDAme1yqQE1NNM5yEKukVa04V5Xafa1cP81DKsAZnMMlOHANdbiDBjSBgIAXeIU369l6tz6sz3npmpX3nMACrK9f18KZLQ==</latexit>

T2
=2

<latexit sha1_base64="YImdQ55vURiHC0oN/YxtJW2hYjk=">AAACAXicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqBvBTbAIXZVEirosuHFZoS9oQphMJ+3QyYOZGzGEuPFX3LhQxK1/4c6/cdJmoa0HLhzOuZd77/FiziSY5rdWWVvf2Nyqbtd2dvf2D/TDo76MEkFoj0Q8EkMPS8pZSHvAgNNhLCgOPE4H3uym8Af3VEgWhV1IY+oEeBIynxEMSnL1EzvAMCWYZ93czWygD5BN0zjPXb1uNs05jFVilaSOSnRc/cseRyQJaAiEYylHlhmDk2EBjHCa1+xE0hiTGZ7QkaIhDqh0svkHuXGulLHhR0JVCMZc/T2R4UDKNPBUZ3GvXPYK8T9vlIB/7WQsjBOgIVks8hNuQGQUcRhjJigBniqCiWDqVoNMscAEVGg1FYK1/PIq6V80rctm665VbzfKOKroFJ2hBrLQFWqjW9RBPUTQI3pGr+hNe9JetHftY9Fa0cqZY/QH2ucP92yXzQ==</latexit>

<latexit sha1_base64="VYO0yZ925oh6EuI7H29EH6RrPyU=">AAAB8nicbVDLSgMxFL1TX7W+qi7dBKvgqsxIUZcFNy4r9AXToWTSTBuaSYYkI5Shn+HGhSJu/Rp3/o2ZdhbaeiBwOOdecu4JE860cd1vp7SxubW9U96t7O0fHB5Vj0+6WqaK0A6RXKp+iDXlTNCOYYbTfqIojkNOe+H0Pvd7T1RpJkXbzBIaxHgsWMQINlbyBzE2E4J51p4PqzW37i6A1olXkBoUaA2rX4ORJGlMhSEca+17bmKCDCvDCKfzyiDVNMFkisfUt1TgmOogW0Seo0urjFAklX3CoIX6eyPDsdazOLSTeUS96uXif56fmuguyJhIUkMFWX4UpRwZifL70YgpSgyfWYKJYjYrIhOsMDG2pYotwVs9eZ10r+veTb3x2Kg1L4o6ynAG53AFHtxCEx6gBR0gIOEZXuHNMc6L8+58LEdLTrFzCn/gfP4AhxWRVQ==</latexit>

T

<latexit sha1_base64="IcZeyzI/CrFtQWs+ExlqYA6hw1w=">AAACAHicbVDLSgMxFL3xWeur6kZwEyyCqzIjRV0W3LisaB/QDiWTZtrQTGZIMkoZunHvVn/Bnbj1T/wDP8NMOwvbeiBwOOe+cvxYcG0c5xutrK6tb2wWtorbO7t7+6WDw6aOEkVZg0YiUm2faCa4ZA3DjWDtWDES+oK1/NFN5rcemdI8kg9mHDMvJAPJA06JsdL9U8/tlcpOxZkCLxM3J2XIUe+Vfrr9iCYhk4YKonXHdWLjpUQZTgWbFLuJZjGhIzJgHUslCZn20umpE3xmlT4OImWfNHiq/u1ISaj1OPRtZUjMUC96mfif10lMcO2lXMaJYZLOFgWJwCbC2b9xnytGjRhbQqji9lZMh0QRamw6xbk12XClAz2x0biLQSyT5kXFvaxU76rl2nEeUgFO4BTOwYUrqMEt1KEBFAbwAq/whp7RO/pAn7PSFZT3HMEc0Ncvn/WW4Q==</latexit>

Thyp

<latexit sha1_base64="WGed9qYugROq43cgOnvXi1fuufQ=">AAAB+3icbVC7TsMwFHXKq5RXKCOLoSCVpUpQBYyVWBiL1JfURJHjOq1Vx4lsB6ii/AoLAwix8iNs/A1OmwFajmTp6Jx7dY+PHzMqlWV9G6W19Y3NrfJ2ZWd3b//APKz2ZJQITLo4YpEY+EgSRjnpKqoYGcSCoNBnpO9Pb3O//0CEpBHvqFlM3BCNOQ0oRkpLnll99GznpO6ESE0wYmknu/DMmtWw5oCrxC5IDRRoe+aXM4pwEhKuMENSDm0rVm6KhKKYkaziJJLECE/RmAw15Sgk0k3n2TN4rpURDCKhH1dwrv7eSFEo5Sz09WSeUS57ufifN0xUcOOmlMeJIhwvDgUJgyqCeRFwRAXBis00QVhQnRXiCRIIK11XRZdgL395lfQuG/ZVo3nfrLXOijrK4BicgjqwwTVogTvQBl2AwRN4Bq/gzciMF+Pd+FiMloxi5wj8gfH5A+b2k6E=</latexit>

w1(T )

w1

<latexit sha1_base64="Pn9RQeiklyWqSCjrVQ7Uuszekik=">AAACBHicbVC7TsMwFL0pr1JeBUYWiwqpU0mgAsZKLIxF6ktqo8hxndaq40S2g1RFXdlZ4RfYECv/wR/wGThtBtpyJEtH59yXjx9zprRtf1uFjc2t7Z3ibmlv/+DwqHx80lFRIgltk4hHsudjRTkTtK2Z5rQXS4pDn9OuP7nP/O4TlYpFoqWnMXVDPBIsYARrI3VbnnPZ8q69csWu2XOgdeLkpAI5ml75ZzCMSBJSoQnHSvUdO9ZuiqVmhNNZaZAoGmMywSPaN1TgkCo3nZ87QxdGGaIgkuYJjebq344Uh0pNQ99UhliP1aqXif95/UQHd27KRJxoKshiUZBwpCOU/R0NmaRE86khmEhmbkVkjCUm2iRUWlqTDZcqUDMTjbMaxDrpXNWcm1r9sV5pVPOQinAG51AFB26hAQ/QhDYQmMALvMKb9Wy9Wx/W56K0YOU9p7AE6+sXwVmYCw==</latexit>

T1 /T3
Figure 8: Regions in the space of dual coordinates. The hyperextended cone of dual
coordinates Thyp is the union of the cone of dual coordinates T (shaded dusty rose) and
its image under the genus one Weyl reflection, w1 (T ), shaded lavender. Additional regions
of moduli space may be accessed by further Weyl reflections, and the (non-convex) part
of moduli space Vis(Thyp ) that may be connected by straight lines through moduli space
to Thyp is bounded in green. By the analysis of [1], BPS black holes necessarily exist in
Vis(Thyp ).

49

3
96
69376
69376
96
0
0
0

4
144
631788
4281984
631788
144
0
0

2
0
5384
−7968
−15936
−23904
−31872
−39840

3
0
69376
227200
473472
789120
1104768
1420416

4
0
631788
47491408
−9517380
−20298336
−30447504
−40596672

1
0
0
0
480
3360
12960
36960

2
0
0
144
−15936
−150480
−677376
−2128560

3
0
0
69376
473472
4375040
23110528
81523584

4
0
0
4281984
−9517380
−82286208
−563180076
−2360300928

5
0
0
119221248
1720814976
5273528256
16877260800
63452512704

1
0
0
0
0
672
12960
105600

2
0
0
0
0
−23904
−677376
−6674400

3
0
0
0
96
789120
23110528
267266592

4
0
0
0
631788
−20298336
−563180076
−7543925760

5
0
0
0
119221248
571788736
16877260800
201410856192

1
0
0
0
0
0
864
36960

2
0
0
0
0
0
−31872
−2128560

3
0
0
0
0
0
1104768
81523584

4
0
0
0
0
144
−30447504
−2360300928

5
0
0
0
0
4247296
945902400
63452512704

q1 = 3

q1 = 2

q1 = 1

q1 = 0

2
144
5384
144
0
0
0
0

q3 0
q2
0
0
1
−2
−4
2
3
−6
4
−8
5
−10
6
−12

q3
0
q2
0
0
1
0
2
0
3
−6
4
−32
5
−110
6
−288

q3
0
q2
0
0
1
0
2
0
3
0
4
−8
5
−110
6
−756

q1 = 4

q3 0
q2
0
∗
1
−2
2
0
0
3
4
0
5
0
6
0

q3
0
q2
0
0
1
0
2
0
3
0
4
0
5
−10
6
−288

1
0
96
288
480
672
864
1056

1
96
96
0
0
0
0
0

5
96
4247296
119221248
119221248
4247296
96
0

6
144
24219184
2152806016
8128381416
2152806016
24219184
144

5
0
4247296
1531634496
1720814976
571788736
945902400
1324263360

6
0
24219184
29149503744
324341564352
20359924864
−17554938576
−26368736640

6
0
0
2152806016
324341564352
−61597979328
−205787147392
−1056669477312

6
0
0
0
8128381416
20359924864
−205787147392
−4254252869280

6
0
0
0
0
2152806016
−17554938576
−1056669477312

Table 5: Genus zero GV invariants n0q1 ,q2 ,q3 for the geometry of Appendix C.4. The cone
of dual coordinates T is shown in pink, the region Vis(Thyp ) \ T is shown in green, and the
region M∞ \ Vis(Thyp ) is shown in yellow. There are nonzero GV invariants everywhere
in the region Vis(Thyp ) where BPS black holes are known to exist, in agreement with the
lattice WGC.

50

we have

w1 (K) = t2 ≥ −t1 ≥ 0 , t3 ≥ 0 .

(C.44)

Correspondingly, the hyperextended Kähler cone is given by
Khyp =

[
w∈Wstable


w(K) = K ∪ w1 (K) = t2 , t3 ≥ 0 , t1 ≥ −t2 .

(C.45)

In §3, we argued that the infinity cone M∞ is dual to the hyperextended Kähler cone,
(3.6)

∨
M∞ = Khyp
= {T2 ≥ T1 ≥ 0 , T3 ≥ 0} .

(C.46)

We may compare this with the GV invariants of Table 5. We have n0q1 ,q2 ,q3 ̸= 0 everywhere
∨
in the interior of M∞ , i.e. for all q2 > q1 > 0, q3 > 0, implying that indeed M∞ = Khyp
.
The hyperextended Kähler cone maps to a region in dual coordinates of the form
Thyp = {T2 ≥ T1 ≥ 0 , T3 ≥ 2T2 } .

(C.47)

Note that Thyp ⊂ M∞ , as required by the lattice WGC, since Thyp ⊆ CBH .
In fact, Vis(Thyp ) ⊆ CBH as discussed in §C.1. Upon examining the fully Weyl-extended
moduli space, we encounter a surprise: as shown in Figure 8, this moduli space is a branched
cover of the Weyl orbit W(Thyp ). In fact, passing repeatedly around the branch point,
much of this moduli space turns out to lie outside M∞ . This sounds worrying from the
perspective of the lattice WGC, but only Vis(Thyp ) ⊆ CBH really matters for our analysis.
Explicitly, this region is
Vis(Thyp ) = T ∪ w1 (T ) ∪ w2 (T ) ∪ w2 ◦ w1 (T ) ∪ w1 ◦ w2 (T )) ∪ w1 ◦ w2 ◦ w1 (T )
= {T2 ≥ T1 ≥ 0 , T3 ≥ min(T1 + T2 , 2T2 − T1 )} ,

(C.48)

i.e., the (non-convex) vee-shaped region outlined by the green lines in Figure 8. One can
then verify that every GV invariant within this cone is non-zero up to the degree calculated
— see Table 5 — so the predictions of the lattice WGC are actually satisfied. The fact that
the fully Weyl-extended moduli space eventually passes outside M∞ is rather an indication
that the BPS black hole solutions undergo wall crossing at the unstable Weyl flop. This
would be very interesting to verify explicitly.

51

References
[1] M. Alim, B. Heidenreich, and T. Rudelius, “The Weak Gravity Conjecture and BPS
Particles,” Fortsch. Phys. 69 no. 11-12, (2021) 2100125, arXiv:2108.08309
[hep-th].
[2] S. Hosono, A. Klemm, S. Theisen, and S.-T. Yau, “Mirror symmetry, mirror map
and applications to Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces,” Commun. Math. Phys. 167 (1995)
301–350, arXiv:hep-th/9308122 [hep-th].
[3] S. Hosono, A. Klemm, S. Theisen, and S.-T. Yau, “Mirror symmetry, mirror map
and applications to complete intersection Calabi-Yau spaces,” Nucl. Phys. B433
(1995) 501–554, arXiv:hep-th/9406055 [hep-th]. [AMS/IP Stud. Adv.
Math.1,545(1996)].
[4] M. Demirtas, A. Rios-Tascon, and L. McAllister, “CYTools: A Software Package for
Analyzing Calabi-Yau Manifolds,” arXiv:2211.03823 [hep-th].
[5] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and A. Rios-Tascon,
“Computational Mirror Symmetry,” to appear .
[6] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis, and C. Vafa, “The String landscape, black
holes and gravity as the weakest force,” JHEP 06 (2007) 060,
arXiv:hep-th/0601001.
[7] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece, and T. Rudelius, “Evidence for a sublattice weak gravity
conjecture,” JHEP 08 (2017) 025, arXiv:1606.08437 [hep-th].
[8] S. Andriolo, D. Junghans, T. Noumi, and G. Shiu, “A Tower Weak Gravity
Conjecture from Infrared Consistency,” Fortsch. Phys. 66 no. 5, (2018) 1800020,
arXiv:1802.04287 [hep-th].
[9] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece, and T. Rudelius, “Sharpening the Weak Gravity
Conjecture with Dimensional Reduction,” JHEP 02 (2016) 140, arXiv:1509.06374
[hep-th].
[10] E. Witten, “Phase transitions in M theory and F theory,” Nucl. Phys. B471 (1996)
195–216, arXiv:hep-th/9603150 [hep-th].

52

[11] C. T. C. Wall, “Classification Problems in Differential Topology. V. On Certain
6-Manifolds.,” Inventiones Mathematicae 1 (Jan., 1966) 355.
[12] S. Boucksom, J.-P. Demailly, M. Paun, and T. Peternell, “The pseudo-effective cone
of a compact kähler manifold and varieties of negative kodaira dimension,” 2004.
https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0405285.
[13] M. F. Atiyah, “On analytic surfaces with double points,” Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 247 no. 1249,
(1958) 237–244.
[14] P. Candelas and X. C. de la Ossa, “Comments on Conifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 342
(1990) 246–268.
[15] H. B. Laufer, “On rational singularities,” American Journal of Mathematics 94
no. 2, (1972) 597–608. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2374639.
[16] S. Katz and D. R. Morrison, “Gorenstein Threefold Singularities with Small
Resolutions via Invariant Theory for Weyl Groups,” arXiv e-prints (Feb., 1992)
alg–geom/9202002, arXiv:alg-geom/9202002 [math.AG].
[17] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “M theory and topological strings. 2.,”
arXiv:hep-th/9812127 [hep-th].
[18] E. Witten, “Topological Sigma Models,” Commun. Math. Phys. 118 (1988) 411.
[19] E. Witten, “Mirror manifolds and topological field theory,” AMS/IP Stud. Adv.
Math. 9 (1998) 121–160, arXiv:hep-th/9112056.
[20] R. Gopakumar and C. Vafa, “M theory and topological strings. 1.,”
arXiv:hep-th/9809187 [hep-th].
[21] M. Dedushenko and E. Witten, “Some Details On The Gopakumar-Vafa and
Ooguri-Vafa Formulas,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 20 (2016) 1–133,
arXiv:1411.7108 [hep-th].
[22] S. Weinberg, “Photons and gravitons in s-matrix theory: Derivation of charge
conservation and equality of gravitational and inertial mass,” Phys. Rev. 135 (Aug,
1964) B1049–B1056. https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.135.B1049.

53

[23] M. T. Grisaru, H. N. Pendleton, and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, “Supergravity and the s
matrix,” Phys. Rev. D 15 (Feb, 1977) 996–1006.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.15.996.
[24] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, and J. Moritz, “Conifold Vacua with Small
Flux Superpotential,” Fortsch. Phys. 68 (2020) 2000085, arXiv:2009.03312
[hep-th].
[25] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and A. Rios-Tascon, “Small
cosmological constants in string theory,” JHEP 12 (2021) 136, arXiv:2107.09064
[hep-th].
[26] C. R. Brodie, A. Constantin, and A. Lukas, “Flops, Gromov-Witten invariants and
symmetries of line bundle cohomology on Calabi-Yau three-folds,” J. Geom. Phys.
171 (2022) 104398, arXiv:2010.06597 [hep-th].
[27] C. R. Brodie, A. Constantin, A. Lukas, and F. Ruehle, “Swampland conjectures and
infinite flop chains,” Phys. Rev. D 104 no. 4, (2021) 046008, arXiv:2104.03325
[hep-th].
[28] C. Brodie, A. Constantin, A. Lukas, and F. Ruehle, “Flops for Complete Intersection
Calabi-Yau Threefolds,” arXiv:2112.12106 [hep-th].
[29] N. Gendler, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and M. Stillman, “Superpotentials
from singular divisors,” JHEP 11 (2022) 142, arXiv:2204.06566 [hep-th].
[30] A. Lukas and F. Ruehle, “Symmetries of Calabi-Yau Prepotentials with Isomorphic
Flops,” arXiv:2210.09369 [hep-th].
[31] A. Strominger, “Massless black holes and conifolds in string theory,” Nucl. Phys.
B451 (1995) 96–108, arXiv:hep-th/9504090 [hep-th].
[32] P. S. Aspinwall, “Enhanced gauge symmetries and Calabi-Yau threefolds,” Phys.
Lett. B371 (1996) 231–237, arXiv:hep-th/9511171 [hep-th].
[33] S. H. Katz, D. R. Morrison, and M. R. Plesser, “Enhanced gauge symmetry in type
II string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996) 105–140, arXiv:hep-th/9601108
[hep-th].

54

[34] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Electric - magnetic duality, monopole condensation, and
confinement in N=2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 426 (1994)
19–52, arXiv:hep-th/9407087. [Erratum: Nucl.Phys.B 430, 485–486 (1994)].
[35] P. M. H. Wilson, “The Kähler cone on Calabi-Yau threefolds,” Invent. Math. 107
no. 3, (1992) 561–583. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01231902.
[36] T. W. Grimm, E. Palti, and I. Valenzuela, “Infinite Distances in Field Space and
Massless Towers of States,” arXiv:1802.08264 [hep-th].
[37] B. Heidenreich, M. Reece, and T. Rudelius, “Emergence of Weak Coupling at Large
Distance in Quantum Gravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 no. 5, (2018) 051601,
arXiv:1802.08698 [hep-th].
[38] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “On the Geometry of the String Landscape and the
Swampland,” Nucl. Phys. B766 (2007) 21–33, arXiv:hep-th/0605264 [hep-th].
[39] T. W. Grimm, C. Li, and E. Palti, “Infinite Distance Networks in Field Space and
Charge Orbits,” arXiv:1811.02571 [hep-th].
[40] P. Corvilain, T. W. Grimm, and I. Valenzuela, “The Swampland Distance
Conjecture for Kähler moduli,” JHEP 08 (2019) 075, arXiv:1812.07548 [hep-th].
[41] N. Gendler and I. Valenzuela, “Merging the Weak Gravity and Distance Conjectures
Using BPS Extremal Black Holes,” arXiv:2004.10768 [hep-th].
[42] C. Schoen, “On fiber products of rational elliptic surfaces with section,”
Mathematische Zeitschrift 197 no. 2, (1988) 177–199.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01215188.
[43] L. B. Anderson, X. Gao, J. Gray, and S.-J. Lee, “Fibrations in CICY Threefolds,”
JHEP 10 (2017) 077, arXiv:1708.07907 [hep-th].
[44] C. Cheung and G. N. Remmen, “Naturalness and the Weak Gravity Conjecture,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 051601, arXiv:1402.2287 [hep-ph].
[45] M. Montero, G. Shiu, and P. Soler, “The Weak Gravity Conjecture in three
dimensions,” JHEP 10 (2016) 159, arXiv:1606.08438 [hep-th].

55

[46] M. Demirtas, C. Long, L. McAllister, and M. Stillman, “Minimal Surfaces and Weak
Gravity,” JHEP 03 (2020) 021, arXiv:1906.08262 [hep-th].
[47] C. Long, A. Sheshmani, C. Vafa, and S.-T. Yau, “Non-Holomorphic Cycles and
Non-BPS Black Branes,” arXiv:2104.06420 [hep-th].
[48] M. Kreuzer and H. Skarke, “Complete classification of reflexive polyhedra in
four-dimensions,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4 (2002) 1209–1230,
arXiv:hep-th/0002240 [hep-th].
[49] M. Montero and H. Parra de Freitas, “New Supersymmetric String Theories from
Discrete Theta Angles,” arXiv:2209.03361 [hep-th].
[50] A. K. Lenstra, J. Hendrik W. Lenstra, and L. Lovász, “Factoring polynomials with
rational coefficients,” Mathematische Annalen 261 (1982) 515–534. URL:
http://cr.yp.to/bib/entries.html#1982/lenstra-lll.
[51] V. V. Batyrev and L. A. Borisov, “On Calabi-Yau complete intersections in toric
varieties,” arXiv:alg-geom/9412017 [alg-geom].

56

