Moduli Stabilization in String Theory
Liam McAllistera and Fernando Quevedob

arXiv:2310.20559v1 [hep-th] 31 Oct 2023

a Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
b DAMTP, University of Cambridge, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge, CB3 0WA, UK

We give an overview of moduli stabilization in compactifications of string theory. We
summarize current methods for construction and analysis of vacua with stabilized moduli,
and we describe applications to cosmology and particle physics. This is a contribution to
the Handbook on Quantum Gravity.

November 1, 2023

1

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 The vacuum problem

3

3 Type IIB flux compactifications
3.1 Scalings and perturbative expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Calabi-Yau compactifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 ISD flux compactifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Superpotential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 Kähler potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
7
8
11
12
15

4 Vacua in type IIB compactifications
4.1 KKLT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 LVS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Supersymmetry breaking and de Sitter uplift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Moduli stabilization and the Standard Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20
20
29
36
43

5 Beyond IIB
5.1 Type IIA flux compactifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Heterotic strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Type I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 M-theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.5 General mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

46
46
49
51
52
52

6 Cosmology
6.1 Inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Inflation in string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 After inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Dark energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

54
54
57
59
62

7 Axions
7.1 Axions in string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 Kreuzer-Skarke axiverse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3 Strong CP problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.4 Axion-photon couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.5 Black hole superradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64
64
66
68
69
70

8 Computational advances

70

9 Conclusions

73

2

1

Introduction

The fundamental physical laws that govern our Universe must describe gravity and quantum mechanics. To discover the laws of quantum gravity, we cannot entirely rely on
terrestrial experiments, or even on cosmological observations: the energies of observable
processes are far too low to give a complete picture, in contrast to the way that collider
experiments eventually revealed the Standard Model of particle physics. We may hope for
some guidance from experiment, but theorists will have to provide a framework.
String theory is such a framework: it is a theory of quantum gravity through which
we can take a constructive approach to exploring possible laws of quantum gravity in our
Universe. The first obstacle is that the world we observe at low energies is four-dimensional,
while the best-understood solutions of string theory are ten-dimensional. Kaluza-Klein
theory [1, 2], now more than a century old, provides a way to bridge this gap. If the extra
dimensions correspond to a six-dimensional compact space that is smaller than the reach
of any experimental probe then only three spatial dimensions will be seen.
However, the size and shape of the extra dimensions are dynamical: they are parameterized by the expectation values of scalar fields known as moduli. Unless the moduli have
large masses, they mediate long-range forces that are not observed in our world. Thus,
a central problem of Kaluza-Klein theories is to provide a dynamical explanation for the
requisite size of the extra dimensions, and to ensure that the moduli masses are consistent
with experiment. Addressing these challenges is the main obstacle in connecting string
theory to observations, and it is the subject of this review.1

2

The vacuum problem

To understand quantum gravity in our four-dimensional, non-supersymmetric Universe, we
will study compactifications of superstring theory on six-dimensional compact spaces, and
seek solutions in which supersymmetry is broken. In this section we will carefully explain
the reasoning that directs us to the class of solutions that are the subject of this chapter:
namely, flux compactifications on orientifolds of Calabi-Yau threefolds.
To begin, we take a product ansatz for a ten-dimensional spacetime,
ds2 = gµν (x)dxµ dxν + gmn (y)dy m dy n ,

(1)

for µ, ν = 0, . . . , 3 and m, n = 4, . . . , 9. We suppose that gmn is a Riemannian metric on
some compact space2 X6 . Defining the Ricci tensors Rµν and Rmn constructed from gµν
and gmn , respectively, the ansatz (1) solves the ten-dimensional vacuum Einstein equations
1
For previous reviews on fluxes and the string landscape see [3–5]. For string cosmology see [6], the
recent review [7], and references therein. The geometry of string compactifications is treated in [8]. For a
more mathematical perspective on flux compactifications, see [9].
2
This space may be a proper six-manifold, or it may be some more singular space on which string
theory remains well-defined, but in both cases we will use the term ‘manifold’.

3

if and only if Rµν = Rmn = 0. Thus, vacuum solutions of string theory are furnished by
Ricci-flat six-manifolds.
Consider a six-manifold X6 with Kähler metric gmn , and define the Riemannian holonomy group Hol(g). If Hol(g) = SU (3) ⊂ SO(6), then g is Ricci-flat, and we call X6 a
Calabi-Yau threefold. It follows that X6 having holonomy SU (3) is a sufficient condition
for a vacuum solution of string theory in compactification on X6 . One striking property of
such solutions is that the compactification preserves some of the supersymmetry found in
the ten-dimensional theory.
We are aware of no argument that Hol(g) = SU (3) is a necessary condition for Ricciflatness, but every example of a compact Ricci-flat six-manifold constructed to date has
holonomy contained in SU (3) (see e.g. [10]). Even so, one should bear in mind the possibility that there may exist compact Ricci-flat six-manifolds with holonomy SO(6) that furnish
non-supersymmetric vacua of string theory. By necessity we will restrict our discussion to
the known examples of vacuum solutions, i.e. to Calabi-Yau threefolds. We stress, however,
that the presence of supersymmetry in this context is not a consequence of an attempt to
explain hierarchies in particle physics: it is instead a powerful aid to theoretical control.
Specifically, the superstring is our starting point because superstring theories are vastly
better-understood than non-supersymmetric string theories, and Calabi-Yau compactifications — which preserve some supersymmetry at the compactification scale, though this
may be broken to nothing at lower energies — are our geometric focus because they are
the only compact Ricci-flat six-manifolds known at the time of this writing.
Vacuum solutions of string theory of the form (1), with gµν = ηµν and with X6 a
Calabi-Yau threefold, are a starting point for discussing cosmology in quantum gravity,
but these solutions are far from realistic. The primary shortcomings are two unwanted
features: unbroken supersymmetry, and light scalar fields known as moduli.
Compactifications of type II string theory on Calabi-Yau threefolds preserve N =
2 supersymmetry in four dimensions, and have exact moduli spaces parameterized by
the scalar components of vector multiplets and hypermultiplets. These moduli spaces
correspond to geometric deformations of the Ricci-flat metric. Our world exhibits no
supersymmetry at all in the infrared, and in particular the chiral representations seen in the
Standard Model are incompatible with N = 2 supersymmetry. Moreover, massless scalar
fields with gravitational-strength couplings — which is precisely how the geometric moduli
manifest in four dimensions — mediate long-range forces3 that are highly constrained,
and are also subject to stringent limits from Big Bang nucleosynthesis. In sum, type
II compactifications on Calabi-Yau threefolds, without any sources of stress-energy, are
plagued by massless moduli and extended supersymmetry, and so cannot furnish realistic
models of our Universe.
More promising are compactifications that are not vacuum solutions, but instead solve
the ten-dimensional equations of motion in the presence of sources of stress-energy in the
3

These limits apply only to spinless fields that are parity-even: pseudoscalars instead mediate spindependent forces that are much less constrained: see §7.

4

internal space. Quantization of the closed string famously reveals a massless spin-2 excitation, the graviton, but there are other important massless fields, including p-form gauge
potentials with associated (p + 1)-form field strengths known as fluxes. These potentials
and field strengths generalize the one-form potential and the electric and magnetic fields
of Maxwell theory, respectively. For example, in type IIB string theory one finds two-form
potentials B2 and C2 with associated three-form field strengths H3 = dB2 and F3 = dC2 .
Dirac quantization ensures that in an appropriate normalization, these three-form fluxes
are elements of H 3 (X6 , Z). Quantized fluxes are a critical source of stress-energy, and give
the subject of flux compactifications its name. In the type II and type I theories, consistency conditions require that flux appears in association with other, localized sources:
D-branes and orientifold planes.
In the broadest sense, a flux compactification could mean any compactification of string
theory containing p-form fluxes. However, in this chapter we will use a restricted definition
that nevertheless encompasses much of the work aiming to describe our Universe in string
theory. By a flux compactification, we will mean a compactification of a superstring theory
on a Calabi-Yau threefold,4 or on an orientifold thereof, that includes p-form fluxes and
any necessary localized sources. Configurations of this sort are non-vacuum solutions.
The principal motivation for studying flux compactifications is that the stress-energy
of fluxes and localized sources ameliorates the problems of massless moduli and unbroken
supersymmetry that are inevitable in Calabi-Yau vacuum configurations. A general expectation, which we will explain in detail below, is that flux compactifications that contain
sufficiently generic fluxes lead to four-dimensional theories that preserve N = 1 or N = 0
supersymmetry, and in which all moduli are massive. We will refer to the set of such
isolated vacua as the landscape of flux vacua.5
In practice it is rarely possible to find vacua that preserve N = 0 supersymmetry
and have all moduli massive already at the classical level. Instead one can proceed by
finding configurations that preserve N = 1 supersymmetry in some approximation — for
example, at leading order in the string loop and α′ expansions — and hence have moduli
spaces parameterized by the scalar components of chiral multiplets. General arguments
predict that the moduli acquire mass from quantum effects, and that the exact vacuum
configurations are isolated points within the leading-order moduli spaces. Finding these
vacua is feasible in some cases, as we will show.
To recap, in aiming to describe the Universe within string theory, one seeks isolated
and non-supersymmetric solutions of the equations of motion of string theory. A primary
strategy of recent decades is to begin with Calabi-Yau vacuum configurations of one of
the superstring theories and introduce sources of stress-energy — quantized fluxes, as well
as localized sources such as D-branes — that lead to controllably small corrections to the
vacuum solution. Among these corrections are supersymmetry-breaking mass splittings,
as well as masses for moduli fields.
We briefly discuss compactifications of M-theory on manifolds of G2 holonomy in §5.4.
‘The Landscape’ is often used to refer to the more general set of all consistent quantum gravity theories,
in any number of spacetime dimensions, with or without moduli, but in this chapter we focus on isolated
four-dimensional vacua.
4

5

5

The study of isolated, non-supersymmetric, non-vacuum solutions is necessarily founded
on approximations. No exact solutions are known, and none appears to us to be on the horizon. In this respect, flux compactification falls into the mainstream of theoretical physics,
but differs from some areas of string theory, and more general mathematical physics, in
which exact methods are prevalent. At the same time, the study of flux vacua owes a great
deal to approximation schemes that are founded on systematic expansions around exact
results, e.g. using mirror symmetry or nonrenormalization, as we will see.

3

Type IIB flux compactifications

The primary class of flux compactifications surveyed in this article are compactifications
of type IIB string theory on orientifolds of Calabi-Yau threefolds. To explain this class of
solutions we will first introduce the type IIB supergravity action and the two fundamental expansions, in gs and α′ (§3.1). In §3.3 we introduce the central ansatz of imaginary
self-dual (ISD) three-form fluxes, and in §3.4 and §3.5 we examine the superpotential and
Kähler potential that describe ISD configurations.
The massless bosonic spectrum of type IIB string theory in ten dimensions consists of
the metric gM N , two-form B2 and dilaton ϕ in the Neveu-Schwarz-Neveu-Schwarz sector,
and the p-form potentials C0 , C2 , C4 in the Ramond-Ramond sector. We define the threeform fluxes
F3 := dC2 ,
H3 := dB2 ,
G3 := F3 − τ H3 ,
(2)
the five-form

1
1
F̃5 := dC4 + B2 ∧ F3 − C2 ∧ H3 ,
2
2
and the complex axiodilaton
τ := C0 + ie−ϕ .

(3)
(4)

The full ten-dimensional effective action S for the bosonic fields can be written as
S = S10 + Sloc , with S10 a bulk action and Sloc encoding the contributions of localized
(0)
objects such as D-branes. The bulk action S10 at leading order in the gs and α′ expansions
is
!
Z
Z
2
2
2
√
1
|∇τ
|
|G
|
|F
|
1
C4 ∧ G3 ∧ G3
3
5
(0)
S10 = 2
−g R −
−
−
+
, (5)
2
2
2κ10
2 (Im τ )
12 Im τ
4·5!
8iκ10
Im τ
where κ10 is the ten-dimensional gravitational coupling,
√ and the Einstein-frame metric gM N
is related to the string-frame metric ĝM N by gM N = Imτ ĝM N . The self-duality condition
F̃5 = ⋆10 F̃5 must be imposed as a constraint in addition to the equations of motion that
follow from (5). The F̃5 Bianchi identity reads
dF̃5 = H3 ∧ F3 + ρD3
loc .
6

(6)

D-branes carry Ramond-Ramond charge, and in particular C4 couples to the worldvolume
of a D3-brane, which Ris why the source term is denoted by ρD3
loc : it captures the D3D3
D3
brane charge Qloc := ρloc from localized sources, including, but not limited to, actual
D3-branes.6

3.1

Scalings and perturbative expansions

The action (5) receives corrections in two different expansions: the α′ and string loop
expansions. These two perturbative expansions can be traced to the two scaling symmetries
of the tree-level bulk action (5) [11, 12]. We consider the transformations
(i)

τ → a2 τ ,

(ii)

gM N → λν gM N ,

G3 → aG3 ,

S10 → S10 ,

τ → λ−2ν τ ,

F̃5 → λ2ν F̃5 ,

S10 → λ4ν S10 .

The transformation (i) is a symmetry contained in the general SL(2, R) invariance of (5),
which acts as
aτ + b
G3
τ→
,
G3 →
.
(7)
cτ + d
cτ + d
On the other hand, although (ii) leaves invariant the tree-level equations of motion, it is
not a symmetry of the action: S10 is not invariant under (ii), but scales.
The transformations (i) and (ii) can be combined, writing a = λω , as:
gM N → λν gM N ,

τ → λ2(ω−ν) τ ,

G3 → λω G3 ,

F5 → λ2ν F5 ,

S10 → λ4ν S10 .
(8)
Both scaling symmetries are broken by quantum and α′ corrections, and as we will now
explain, the corresponding perturbative expansions can be organized by the amount that
the scaling symmetries are broken.
The string loop expansion is in powers of gs = ⟨eϕ ⟩, and the α′ expansion is essentially
a derivative expansion. We write the general action, including all perturbative corrections,
schematically as:
∞
X
(m,n)
S10 =
(α′ )m gsn S10
(9)
m,n=0

(m,n)

with a similar expansion for Sloc . Here S10
(m,n)
(p,r,n)
S10 ≡ S10
∝

Z

√
−g



1
Im τ

can be written as [11]:

(2n−p+r+1)/2

(g ◦◦ R◦◦◦◦ )p [g ◦◦ g ◦◦ g ◦◦ G◦◦◦ G◦◦◦ ]r + . . . ,

(10)
where ◦ determines the appropriate index structure, and we have split m = p + r − 1 since
it is convenient to separate the m dependence in terms of powers of the curvature R and
powers of G3 . We have not written explicitly the terms depending on F5 or on higher
6

Our conventions are such that D3-branes and anti-D3-branes carry positive and negative D3-brane
charge QD3
loc , respectively.

7

derivatives of the dilaton, which we include in the ellipses. The p and r powers in Im τ
appear because we are writing the action in Einstein frame.
Notice that both p = 1, r = 0 and p = 0, r = 1 give tree-level results for m = 0,
n = 0. Also, taking m = 3 with all combinations of p, r = 0, 1, 2, 3 satisfying p + r = 4
reproduces the known α′3 corrections (starting with R4 , etc.) that are known to be the
first non-vanishing α′ corrections (see for instance [13–15]). Terms with smaller values of
(m,n)
m cancel due to supersymmetry. The corrected actions S10 transform under the scalings
as:
(m,n)
(m,n)
S10 → λ4ν−2n(w−ν)+m(w−2ν) S10 .
(11)
We can then use the scaling transformations as a bookkeeping tool to identify the
(m,n)
different corrections S10 . This will be useful in section §3.5.2 in order to uncover the
structure of the four-dimensional effective actions in string compactifications.

3.2

Calabi-Yau compactifications

In compactifying type IIB string theory on a Calabi-Yau threefold X, one needs to specify
the three-form fluxes H3 and F3 [16, 17]. Dirac quantization requires that (in units where
(2π)2 α′ ≡ ℓ2s = 1)
F3 , H3 ∈ H 3 (X, Z) ,
(12)
and so the data of a choice of fluxes is a set of integers.
Gauss’s law presents an immediate obstacle to constructing flux compactifications.
Many sources of stress energy, including D-branes as well as certain flux configurations,
carry positive charge under Ramond-Ramond p-form gauge symmetries. In a compact
space, the total charge must be zero, so in the absence of sources with negative charge, a
consistent compactification must have no charged sources whatsoever. Specifically, integrating (6), we find the constraint
Z
D3
D3
0 = Qloc + H3 ∧ F3 = QD3
(13)
loc + Qflux .
Thus, a solution in which QD3
flux is positive — and we will see soon that these are precisely
the solutions of interest for moduli stabilization — is then possible only in the presence of
localized sources of negative D3-brane charge.
A way forward is provided by orientifolds. Orientifold planes are non-dynamical objects
that have negative tension, and carry negative charge with respect to Ramond-Ramond
potentials. As an example, consider type IIB string theory compactified on a Calabi-Yau
threefold X6 . At certain loci in the complex structure moduli space of X6 , the manifold
may admit a holomorphic involution
σ : X6 → X6 ,

(14)

whose fixed loci are points and/or divisors in X6 . If the action of σ is paired with orientation
reversal Ωws on the string worldsheet and multiplication by (−1)FL , with FL the left-moving
8

Field

Symbol

Range

Kähler moduli

Ta

1,1
a = 1, . . . , h+

complex structure moduli

zi

i = 1, . . . , h2,1
−

two-forms

Gα

vector multiplets

Vr

2,1
r = 1, . . . , h+

axiodilaton

τ

−

α = 1, . . . , h1,1
−

Table 1: N = 1 multiplets in an O3/O7 orientifold.
fermion number,
O := σ Ωws (−1)FL ,

(15)

then the configuration that results from projecting onto states with O = +1 is called an
O3/O7 orientifold. The fixed loci, which are known as O3-planes and O7-planes, carry
negative7 charge with respect to C4 , i.e. they contribute negatively to QD3
loc .
The orientifold projection removes half of the supercharges preserved by X6 , leading to
a theory with N = 1 supersymmetry in four dimensions. From each hypermultiplet arising
in type IIB compactification on X6 , a chiral multiplet survives the projection, while from
each N = 2 vector multiplet either an N = 1 vector multiplet or a chiral multiplet survives.
The action of O on Dolbeault cohomology classes defines even and odd eigenspaces H±p,q
1,1
with corresponding dimensions hp,q
hypermultiplets yield h1,1
± . The h
+ Kähler moduli Ta
2,1
2,1
and h1,1
two-forms
G
,
while
the
h
hypermultiplets
yield
h
complex
structure moduli
α
−
−
2,1
zi and h+ vector multiplets Vr : see Table 1. For simplicity of presentation we will mostly
2,1
discuss orientifolds with h1,1
− = h+ = 0, in which the massless closed-string scalar fields
are the geometric moduli Ta and zi , and the axiodilaton τ .8
Compactification of type IIB string theory on an O3/O7 orientifold9 of a Calabi-Yau
threefold is a promising starting point for finding flux compactifications that involve nontrivial sources and that preserve at most N = 1 supersymmetry. From there, one can
further aim to find non-supersymmetric solutions without moduli.
Four-dimensional N = 1 supersymmetric action
We can now see how the four-dimensional action transforms under the scaling transformations and how it can be expanded in powers of α′ and gs . For this we need to use that the
volume of X6 scales as
Z
p
(16)
V=
d6 x g (6) → λ3ν V ,
X6

7

In certain cases, O7-planes that break supersymmetry can carry positive charge: see e.g. [18].
1,1
̸= 0.
See e.g. [18–24] for discussions of the geometry and physics of orientifolds with h−
9
We will discuss other string theories in §5. Within type IIB string theory, an advantage of O3/O7 orientifolds compared to O5/O9 orientifolds is the possibility of conformally Calabi-Yau flux compactifications,
as we will explain in §3.3.
8

9

√
where the volume is measured in units of the string length ℓs = 2π α′ . Then the fourE
, Kähler moduli τa , complex structure moduli zi and
dimensional Einstein-frame metric gµν
Lagrangian L scale as
E
E
gµν
= Vgµν → λ4ν gµν
,

τa → λ2ν τa ,

zi → zi ,

L → λ4ν L .

(17)

In this article we are interested in N = 1 supersymmetric compactifications. The
general couplings of four-dimensional supergravity to matter fields were computed in [25,
26]. Up to two derivatives and neglecting the contributions of vector multiplets, the action
for an arbitrary number of chiral superfields ΦM coupled to supergravity is specified by a
superpotential W (ΦM ) and a Kähler potential K(ΦM , Φ̄N̄ ), with W a holomorphic function
and K a real analytic function of the chiral superfields ΦM .
We write the four-dimensional Lagrangian in the superconformal formalism [25, 26] in
terms of the superpotential W and Kähler potential K with conformal compensator C as

Z
Z
L
4
2
3
−K/3
p
= d θ CCe
d θ C W + h.c. .
(18)
+
−g E

Using the scaling of the ten-dimensional actions given in (11) we infer that the perturbative
corrections to K can be written as [11]:
(m,n)
(m,n)
2
e−K/3
→ λ 3 (ω+2ν)−2(ω−ν)n+(ω−2ν)m e−K/3
,
(19)
Here we have used that the weight of θ is ν in order for the fermionic kinetic terms to
transform appropriately, and thus the compensator C carries weight −(ω + 2ν)/3.
The superpotential W (which scales as W → λω W ) is holomorphic and therefore receives no perturbative corrections whatsoever,10 whereas the Kähler potential K is not
holomorphic and is subject to both perturbative corrections — as can be seen from (19)
— as well as non-perturbative corrections. Thus we can write
W = Wtree + Wnp ,

K = Ktree + Kpert + Knp .

(20)

After introducing the central ansatz for type IIB flux compactifications in §3.3, we will
examine each of Wtree (§3.4.1), Wnp (§3.4.2), Ktree (§3.5.1), and Kpert (§3.5.2). We will not
treat Knp , which is poorly understood.
Knowing K and W we can compute all the relevant couplings for the bosonic and
fermionic components of the chiral superfields ΦM . In particular, the F-term scalar potential, which is the key quantity to compute in order to find the vacuum states, depends on
W and K as follows:
i
h
2
K
M N̄
(21)
VF = e K DM W D̄N̄ W − 3|W | ,

where K M N̄ is the inverse of the Kähler metric KM N̄ = ∂M ∂N̄ K, and DM W = ∂M W +
KM W is the Kähler covariant derivative, with KM = ∂M K. Here ∂M refers to the derivative
with respect to the scalar component ϕM of the superfield ΦM , and we have adopted units
in which Mpl = 1.
10
The original argument uses the shift symmetry for the dilaton field [27–29], but for flux compactifications the dilaton appears in the superpotential and so a more refined proof of the non-renormalization
theorem, given in [30], is needed.

10

3.3

ISD flux compactifications

In a flux compactification,11 the metric of the internal space is not Ricci-flat, because
the stress-energy of fluxes drives deviations from the Calabi-Yau vacuum configuration.
However, in an important class of type IIB flux compactifications, the metric is conformal
to a Calabi-Yau metric, differing only by a warp factor. To see this, we consider the warped
ansatz
ds2 = e2A(y) gµν (x)dxµ dxν + e−2A(y) gmn (y)dy m dy n ,
(22)
with gmn a Riemannian metric on a compact space X6 that admits a Calabi-Yau metric
CY
CY
gmn
. In a Calabi-Yau vacuum solution, A(y) is trivial and gmn = gmn
on X6 , whereas
CY
in the presence of general sources, gmn is unrelated to gmn . Defining the Hodge star ⋆
constructed from the metric gmn , one finds that ⋆2 = −1, so ⋆ has eigenvalues ±i. Writing
the three-form fluxes F3 and H3 in the complex combination
G3 := F3 − τ H3 ,

(23)

with τ the axiodilaton, we can decompose G3 into +i and −i eigenspaces of ⋆,
G± := G3 ∓ i ⋆ G3 ,

(24)

which are termed imaginary self-dual (ISD) and imaginary anti-self-dual (IASD), respectively.
Consider type IIB string theory compactified on an O3/O7 orientifold of a CalabiYau threefold, and containing only ISD fluxes, D3-branes, D7-branes, O3-planes, and O7planes, without IASD fluxes and without antibranes. Such a configuration is called an ISD
compactification.
Several key properties of ISD compactifications were recognized by Giddings, Kachru,
CY
and Polchinski [17]. First, the Einstein equations for (22) are solved by gmn = gmn
with a
12
−2A(y)
generally nontrivial warp factor A(y). That is, the metric e
gmn (y) on the internal
space is conformally Calabi-Yau. Second, the classical solution at leading order in the
α′ expansion enjoys a dilatation symmetry: the size of X6 is a modulus (see §3.5.1).
Third, generic ISD fluxes give masses to the complex structure moduli of X6 , and to
the axiodilaton. This is easy to see from the ten-dimensional action,
Z
(25)
S10 ⊃
G3 ∧ ⋆G3 ,
X6

in which the Hodge star, which depends on the metric gmn , couples to the fluxes.13
11

In this review we concentrate on fluxes of antisymmetric tensor fields. More general fluxes, including
geometric fluxes (see e.g. [31]) and non-geometric fluxes [32, 33] are possible: see the review [34].
12
The dynamics of the warp factor is analyzed in [35, 36].
13
One might wonder how to choose quantized fluxes that are sufficiently generic to stabilize all, rather
than just some, of the complex structure moduli. We will address this below.

11

Dimensional reduction of an ISD compactification leads to an N = 1 supersymmetric
effective action in four dimensions. On general grounds the resulting superpotential W
and Kähler potential K depend on the moduli as
W = W (zi , Ta , τ ) ,

K = K(zi , z̄i , Ta , T a , τ, τ̄ ) ,

(26)

However, as we will now see, there is a great deal of structure in W and K that can be
exploited in searching for vacua.

3.4

Superpotential

3.4.1

Flux superpotential

The classical Gukov-Vafa-Witten flux superpotential is [37]
q Z
Wtree ≡ Wflux := π2
G3 ∧ Ω ,

(27)

X6

where Ω is the holomorphic (3, 0) form on X6 , and we have adopted a convenient normalization.
To better understand this expression,
we take αA , β A to be a symplectic basis of
R
H 3 (X6 , Z), with A = 0, . . . , h2,1 and with X6 αA ∧ β B = δAB , and we introduce the periods
R
!  
Ω ∧ βA
FA
⃗ := R
.
(28)
Π
=
zA
Ω ∧ αA
The periods z A furnish local projective coordinates on complex structure moduli space:
in a patch where z 0 ̸= 0, we can fix the normalization of Ω to set z 0 = 1, and then use
{zi }, i = 1, . . . , h2,1 as independent coordinates.
We write the integrals of the three-form fluxes as
Z

Z

Z
Z
A
A
⃗h :=
f⃗ :=
F3 ∧ αA , F3 ∧ α ,
H3 ∧ αA , H3 ∧ α .
(29)
2,1 +2

By Dirac quantization, f⃗, ⃗h ∈ Z2h

. Introducing the symplectic matrix


0 I
Σ :=
,
−I 0

(30)

we can express (27) as the pairing
Wflux (τ, zi ) =

q



2 ⃗T
Π ·Σ· f⃗ − τ ⃗h
π

.

(31)

Thus, the flux superpotential is determined by the periods, the integer flux quanta f⃗ and
⃗h, and the axiodilaton τ .
12

3.4.2

Non-perturbative superpotential

The Kähler moduli Ta do not appear in the classical flux superpotential Wflux , and indeed
do not appear in W at any perturbative order in α′ or gs . We explained this fact in general
terms in §3.1, but we will now be more specific about the dependence on Ta .
1,1
Suppose that {Da }, a = 1, . . . , h+
is a basis of H4 (X6 , Z) consisting of effective divisors
(holomorphic four-cycles), with complexified volumes Ta given by
Z
Z
1
Ta :=
J ∧J +i
C4 ≡ τa + iθa ,
(32)
2 Da
Da
where J is the Kähler form, and we have introduced the axion θa and the volume modulus
(or saxion) τa .
The action (5) is invariant under continuous shifts
θa → θa + c ,

c ∈ R.

(33)

This shift symmetry descends from the gauge redundancy of the C4 kinetic term proportional to |F̃5 |2 , and is known as a Peccei-Quinn (PQ) symmetry.14 Because the string
worldsheet carries no Ramond-Ramond charge, the PQ symmetry (33) of C4 is not broken
at any order in string perturbation theory, or at any order in α′ .
Any correction to the effective action at some perturbative order in the α′ expansion
would have to scale as a negative power of (some of) the τa , in order to vanish in the limit
of infinite volume. But on general grounds the superpotential must be holomorphic, and so
it can only depend on cycle volumes via the complex combination Ta = τa + iθa : the Ta are
the ‘good Kähler coordinates’ on Kähler moduli space. But no term polynomial in 1/Ta is
invariant under the PQ symmetry (33), which remains unbroken to all perturbative orders,
and so the superpotential must have no perturbative dependence on the Kähler moduli Ta .
The symmetry (33) can be broken by non-perturbative effects from Euclidean D3branes, causing W to depend on exponentials of the Ta , as we now explain. We suppose
that D = ca Da , with ca ∈ Z, is a four-cycle in X6 , but is not necessarily an effective divisor.
Then the semiclassical action of a Euclidean D3-brane wrapping D is
Z
1
SED3 = Vol(D) + i
C4 .
(34)
2π
D
If D is an effective divisor, it is calibrated by the Kähler form J, and so obeys
Z
1
Vol(D) =
J ∧J,
2 D
so that

14

1
SED3 = ca Ta .
2π

The Peccei-Quinn symmetry is discussed from a slightly different perspective in §7.1.

13

(35)

(36)

Euclidean D3-branes wrapping such a divisor contribute to the superpotential, rather than
to the Kähler potential or higher F-terms, if and only if the associated Dirac operator on D
has exactly two zero modes. These zero modes can be counted in terms of the dimensions
of the orientifold-graded sheaf cohomology groups H±i (D, OD ), with i = 0, 1, 2. If D is
smooth, effective, and obeys the rigidity condition15
dim H+• (D, OD ) = (1, 0, 0) ,

dim H−• (D, OD ) = 0 ,

(37)

with • standing for i = 0, 1, 2, then16 Euclidean D3-branes wrapping D generate the nonperturbative superpotential term
a

WED3|D,rigid = A(zi , zD3 , zD7 , τ )e−2πc Ta .

(38)

The prefactor A(zi , zD3 , zD7 , τ ) is a one-loop Pfaffian that can depend on the complex
structure moduli, the axiodilaton, and the positions zD3 and zD7 of any spacetime-filling
D3-branes (see e.g. [44–47]) and D7-branes [48]. Rigidity of D implies that A(zi , zD3 , zD7 , τ )
is not identically vanishing, though it is generally a section of a nontrivial bundle on moduli
space, with zeros on certain subloci — for example, if a spacetime-filling D3-brane coincides
with D [49].
If a smooth divisor D fulfilling (37) obeys the further condition that its uplift to Ftheory17 has trivial intermediate Jacobian, we call D pure rigid, and its Pfaffian has no
dependence on zi , zD7 , or τ : the Pfaffian of a pure rigid divisor is a section of the trivial
bundle over the moduli space of the associated fourfold [55].
Thus, a pure rigid divisor in a compactification that contains no spacetime-filling D3branes generates a simple exponential,
a

WED3|D,pure rigid = A e−2πc Ta ,

(39)

with A a constant.
The gaugino condensate superpotential is rather analogous to WED3 . Consider a stack of
D7-branes that wrap an effective divisor D = ca Da and generate an N = 1 supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory with gauge group G and with h0,2 (D)+h0,1 (D) chiral multiplets charged
in the adjoint of G. If h0,2 (D) = h0,1 (D) = 0 then the theory is pure super-Yang-Mills,
and at low energies it generates a gaugino condensate superpotential,
a

Wλλ|D = A(zi , zD3 , τ )e−2πc Ta /c(G) ,
15

(40)

Beware that in some settings D is called rigid if it fulfills the weaker condition dim H 2 (D, OD ) = 0.
The rigidity condition (37) alone is neither necessary nor sufficient for a non-perturbative superpotential contribution on an effective divisor D. If D is smooth then (37) is indeed sufficient [38]. For certain
singular D, (37) is not necessary, but a corrected sufficient condition that accounts for the singular loci
is applicable [39]. For certain other D that do not fulfill (37) by fault of having dim H 2 (D, OD ) > 0,
rigidification by flux can lead to a superpotential term: Euclidean D3-branes wrapping such a D and
bearing magnetic flux can contribute to W (see e.g. [40–43]). However, in the examples given below we
will be able to consistently neglect contributions from singular divisors or divisors rigidified by flux.
17
For reviews on F-theory see [50, 51], and for relations between Euclidean D3-branes and Euclidean
M5-branes see e.g. [52]. Euclidean M5-branes are considered from the perspective of the heterotic dual
in [53]. A comprehensive review of D-brane instantons, including many phenomena we have omitted here,
appears in [54].
16

14

where c(G) is the dual Coxeter number of G. The Pfaffian now has the interpretation of
resulting from a threshold correction to the gauge coupling. In particular, the dependence
on zD3 occurs because strings stretched between the D7-brane stack and a D3-brane produce chiral multiplets charged in the fundamental representation of G, and whose masses
affect the low-energy condensate.
The full superpotential thus takes the form
W = Wflux (τ, zi ) + Wnp (τ, zi , Ta ) ,

(41)

Wnp = WED3 + Wλλ + WED(-1) .

(42)

with
Here WED3 denotes the sum of all Euclidean D3-brane terms, Wλλ is the sum of all gaugino
condensate terms, and WED(-1) is generated by Euclidean D(-1)-branes, i.e. D-instantons,
and obeys
WED(-1) = O(e−πτ ) .
(43)
Because WED3 and Wλλ are exponential in four-cycle volumes, and WED(-1) is exponential in τ , we conclude that to all perturbative orders in the α′ and gs expansions, the
superpotential is given by
W ≈ Wflux ,
(44)
up to corrections that are exponentially small when four-cycle volumes Ta are large and
the string coupling Im(τ ) is weak.

3.5

Kähler potential

3.5.1

Tree level

At the sphere level, the moduli space of closed string fields in an O3/O7 orientifold of
a Calabi-Yau threefold X6 factorizes into the complex structure, Kähler, and axiodilaton
moduli spaces:
M = Mcs (X6 ) × MK (X6 ) × Mτ .
(45)
Therefore the metric for the moduli is block diagonal, and the Kähler potential splits into
dilaton, complex structure and Kähler moduli terms [19]:

 Z




(46)
Ktree = − ln −i(τ − τ̄ ) − ln −i
Ω(zi ) ∧ Ω(z̄i ) − 2 ln V(Ta , T a ) .
X6

The holomorphic (3, 0)-form Ω encodes the dependence on complex structure moduli, as
can be seen by expanding in a basis of three-forms. At large complex structure (LCS), we
have
Z
⃗ † ·Σ·Π
⃗,
Ω∧Ω=Π
(47)
X6

⃗ defined in (28) and the symplectic matrix Σ defined in (30).
in terms of the periods Π
15

To understand the dependence of Ktree on the Kähler moduli, we recall from (32) that
the complexified four-cycle volumes are Ta = τa + iθa , with axion Rfields θa appearing from
the compactification of the Ramond-Ramond four-form C4 , θa = Da C4 . As we explained
in §3.4.2, the axions θa enjoy PQ symmetries (33) inherited from the gauge symmetry of
C4 . In combination with holomorphy of W , the PQ symmetries (33) forbid the Ta from
appearing in W at any perturbative order. But the Kähler potential is not holomorphic,
and so Ktree and Kpert do depend on the τa , but not on the θa .
We introduce a basis {ωa } of H 2 (X, Z) and write the Kähler form as
J = ta ωa ,

(48)

where the Kähler parameters ta measure the volumes of two-cycles. Then the volume V of
X6 can be written
Z
1
1
J ∧ J ∧ J = κabc ta tb tc ,
(49)
V=
6 X6
6
where
κabc =

Z

X

ωa ∧ ωb ∧ ωc

(50)

are the triple intersection numbers. The four-cycle volumes τa are then given by
τa =

∂V
1
=
κabc tb tc .
∂ta
2

(51)

Note that V is written explicitly as a function of the ta , but the Kähler coordinates are
Ta = τa + iθa . The relation between ta and τa is not in general analytically invertible, and
so the dependence of K on τa is usually only implicit, via K(τa ) = K(tb (τa )).
Even though the dependence of Ktree on the τa is complicated and model-dependent,
its dependence on V is simple. Under the scaling (16), (17) with ν = 1/2,
τa → λτa ,

(52)

we have
V → λ3/2 V ,

Ktree → Ktree − 3 ln λ .

(53)

By taking derivatives with respect to λ and evaluating at λ = 1 we derive the identity
ab̄
Ktree
Katree Kb̄tree = 3 .

(54)

This powerful result is known as the no-scale property [56].
A key consequence of no-scale structure is that the negative term −3|W |2 in the scalar
ab̄
potential (21) is precisely cancelled by the term Ktree
Katree Kb̄tree |W |2 . Thus, if the superpotential is independent of the Kähler moduli — which is true at tree level, cf. Wtree in (27)
— the scalar potential reduces to
Vtree = Vno-scale = eK K M N̄ DM W D̄N̄ W ,
16

(55)

where now M, N = 1, . . . , h2,1 + 1, corresponding to the complex structure moduli zi and
the dilaton τ , and everything on the right-hand side of (55) is understood to be evaluated
using Wtree and Ktree .
The importance of this result cannot be overemphasized. Some of its implications are:
• The tree-level scalar potential Vno-scale is positive-definite, and so the minima in the
zi and τ directions have vanishing F-terms for these fields: DM W = 0.
• Supersymmetry is broken in the Kähler moduli directions, since DTa W is arbitrary
in the minimum of Vno-scale .
• The value of Vno-scale is zero at the minimum, which means that the cosmological
constant vanishes, even though supersymmetry is broken (by the F-terms DTa W ).
• The presence of any source of positive energy will drive a runaway to large volume:
recall that eK ∝ V −2 times higher-order terms in the 1/V expansion.
• The Kähler moduli Ta are not stabilized by Vno-scale . Thus, stabilization of the Ta
is possible only once quantum corrections to the scalar potential — through one or
more of Wnp , Kpert , and Knp — impact the vacuum structure.
3.5.2

Perturbative corrections

The Kähler potential beyond tree-level is the least understood of the quantities that are
important in moduli stabilization. The tree-level expression Ktree in (46) is the dominant
contribution to the kinetic terms but, due to the no-scale property (54), the scalar potential
computed with K = Ktree and W = Wtree = Wflux vanishes. Thus, the leading contributions
to V will come from higher-order perturbative (or non-perturbative) corrections to K, or
from the non-perturbative superpotential.
We have seen in §3.1 that the Kähler potential receives corrections order by order in
perturbation theory in both the string loop and α′ expansions. The scaling properties (19)
serve to organize these corrections: the tree-level expression Ktree given in (46) satisfies the
(m, n) = (0, 0) scaling, and for general values of m, n we use (19) to write the expression
for the Kähler potential to all orders in perturbation theory as:
#
n "

1/2 m
X
(Imτ
)
1
.
(56)
e−K/3 = (Imτ )1/3 V 2/3
A(m,n)
Imτ
V 1/3
m,n
The coefficients A(m,n) depend on scale-invariant combinations of the fields, such as the
complex structure moduli zi or ratios of Kähler moduli.
In terms of the tree-level superpotential W0 := ⟨Wflux ⟩, cf. (27), we write the scalar
potential at order m, n as:
#

n "
1/2 m
1
(Imτ
)
|W0 |2
V (m,n) = B (m,n)
,
(57)
Imτ
V 1/3
V 2 Imτ
17

where B (m,n) are scale-invariant combinations of the fields.
The expression (21) for the scalar potential in terms of K and W is the most general
possibility for an N = 1 supersymmetric Lagrangian in which each term has at most
two spacetime derivatives of the fields. However, in general there are higher-derivative
corrections to the Lagrangian, for example involving higher powers of the curvature. By
supersymmetry, such higher-derivative corrections can also affect the structure of the scalar
potential, and need to be considered.
In string theory, these corrections to the scalar potential include higher powers of
the fluxes G3 , corresponding to higher powers of W0 , which in turn reflect higher-order
superspace covariant derivatives, i.e. F-terms. The scaling analysis easily captures these
higher powers of W0 by writing:
!r−1
2
|W
|
0
,
m=p+r−1
(58)
B (m,n) = B (m,n,r)
2/3
V Imτ
where B (m,n,r) is a scale-invariant
 function of the fields that is independent of W0 . The
2
2/3
quantity ϵ := |W0 | / V Imτ is a scale-invariant function of the fields proportional to
2
2
(gF/M 2 ) ≃ m3/2 /M , where F is the auxiliary field that breaks supersymmetry, M is
the cutoff scale, here identified with the Kaluza-Klein scale, m3/2 is the gravitino mass, and
g is the coupling between heavy Kaluza-Klein states and light modes. Then ϵ ≃ (m3/2 /M )2
is a natural small parameter, as required for the validity of the EFT at scales below the
cutoff M .
The scalar potential at each given order (m, n, r) in the α′ , string loop, and F-term
expansions, with small parameters 1/V, 1/Imτ , and ϵ, respectively, can then be written as:
#
!r
n "

1/2 m
2
(m,n,r)
(Imτ
)
|W
|
1
B
0
.
(59)
V (m,n,r) =
V 4/3
Imτ
V 1/3
V 2/3 Imτ
The leading-order terms can be classified as follows.
• m = n = 0, r = 1. This is the standard tree-level potential,
V

(0,0,1)

B (0,0,1) |W0 |2
=
,
Imτ V 2

no-scale =⇒ B (0,0,1) = 0 .

(60)

• m = 1, n = 0, r = 1. This α′1 term may in principle appear, and the corresponding
scalar potential,
B (1,0,1) |W0 |2
V (1,0,1) = √
,
(61)
Imτ V 7/3
could be dominant in a 1/V expansion, because the tree-level potential V (0,0,1) vanishes. However, general dimensional analysis arguments show that B (1,0,1) = 0 [12].
Even though corrections that lead to V −7/3 behaviour for the scalar potential have
not yet been identified, it is an open question whether they may occur at higher
string loops, i.e. for (m, n, r) = (1, n, 1) with n > 0.
18

• m = 2, n = 2, r = 1. This is an α′2 correction at loop order in the string expansion,
either as one-loop open strings (the open string loop counting parameter is n − 1) or
as tree-level exchange of Kaluza-Klein states among D-branes [57–61] (see also [62]).
However, since the terms in e−K/3 proportional to A(2,n) are independent of V for all n,
cf. (56), the associated contribution to the scalar potential vanishes, corresponding to
what has been called extended no-scale structure [59, 60]. It follows that B (2,2,1) = 0.
V (2,2,1) =

B (2,2,1) |W0 |2
,
(Imτ )2 V 8/3

extended no-scale =⇒ B (2,2,1) = 0 .

(62)

The same argument applies to any other allowed values for n and r for fixed m = 2,
i.e. B (2,n,r) = 0.
• m = 3, n = 0, r = 1. These are string tree-level, α′3 corrections that have been explicitly calculated [15] and come from the ten-dimensional R4 , R3 |G3 |2 , and R2 (∇G3 )2
terms:
√
B (3,0,1) Imτ |W0 |2
(3,0,1)
.
(63)
V
=
V3
Explicit calculations determine the coefficient B (3,0,1) to be proportional to the Euler
number of the original Calabi-Yau manifold. This correction is the best understood:
it is an N = 2 supersymmetric correction that is present even without orientifolding
[63–66]. This result is expected to receive N = 1 corrections.
• m = 4, n = 2, r = 1. These are α′4 , open string one-loop and O(F 2 ) corrections,
V

(4,2,1)

B (4,2,1) |W0 |2
=
.
Imτ V 10/3

(64)

These corrections have also been computed in particular cases [57], and are subdominant compared to the α′3 correction V (3,0,1) when V is large enough to trust the α′
expansion.
• m = 3, n = 0, r = 2. These are string tree-level, α′3 corrections at order O(F 4 ) in
auxiliary fields,
B (3,0,2) |W0 |4
(3,0,2)
.
(65)
V
= √
Imτ V 11/3
We could continue with terms that depend on higher powers of the string coupling
and inverse volume, but typically these will be subdominant at large volume and weak
coupling.18 Moreover, we have considered only a power-law expansion of e−K/3 , and in
18
A variety of techniques have been used to extract information about corrections to the Kähler potential, including explicit string worldsheet calculations and M-theory and F-theory analyses. Both α′2
and α′3 corrections have been obtained, consistent with the scaling behavior outlined above. Some such
contributions shift the associated coefficient B (m,n,r) , while others can be absorbed by field redefinitions.
See for instance [67–72].

19

general the series expansion may include logarithmic terms. Such corrections may result
from loops of light fields rather than of heavy Kaluza-Klein modes. Corrections of this
type were recently considered in [73–78].
The expansion (59) we have given for the scalar potential is in terms of powers of
1/V, 1/Imτ , and ϵ. However, once D-branes are incorporated, there is a new expansion
parameter: the gauge coupling in the D-brane theory, which is inversely proportional to
the volume of the cycle wrapped by the D-brane. Thus each of the Kähler moduli may
provide an extra expansion parameter, just as in §3.4.2 the superpotential received nonperturbative corrections in an expansion in cycle volumes.

4

Vacua in type IIB compactifications

We have now introduced enough of the structure of type IIB flux compactifications on
O3/O7 orientifolds to be able to detail the construction of isolated vacua, i.e. solutions
with stabilized moduli.

4.1

KKLT

We will begin with the KKLT scenario, proposed twenty years ago by Kachru, Kallosh,
Linde, and Trivedi [79].
At leading order in the α′ and gs expansions, the effective theory of an O3/O7 orientifold
flux compactification is described by
W ≈ Wflux (zi , τ ) ,

K ≈ Ktree ,

(66)

where Wflux and Ktree are given in given in (27) and (46), respectively. In such theories
there typically exist points zi⋆ , τ ⋆ in the joint complex structure and axiodilaton moduli
space at which the F-terms of these fields vanish,
Dzi W z⋆ ,τ ⋆ = Dτ W z⋆ ,τ ⋆ = 0 ,
i

(67)

i

and the complex structure moduli and axiodilaton are stabilized by supersymmetric mass
terms. We define the expectation value of the flux superpotential,
W0 := ⟨Wflux ⟩ ≡ Wflux (zi⋆ , τ ⋆ ) ,

(68)

where the brackets denote evaluation on the configuration zi⋆ , τ ⋆ at which the complex
structure moduli and axiodilaton are stabilized.
The F-terms of the Kähler moduli Ta , again at leading order in α′ and gs , read
DTa W z⋆ ,τ ⋆ ≈ W0 ∂Ta Ktree ,

(69)

i

and so W0 is the order parameter measuring supersymmetry breaking. Except in the highly
non-generic situation where W0 = 0, the F-terms (69) do not vanish anywhere inside the
20

moduli space, and in the classical theory at leading order in α′ , supersymmetry is broken
by the Kähler moduli F-terms.
The first key idea of the KKLT scenario is that if W0 is exponentially small, then the
correspondingly small breaking of supersymmetry by fluxes can be compensated by a nonperturbative superpotential term, leading to supersymmetric stabilization of all moduli in
an AdS4 vacuum, in a parameter regime where computational control is possible.
The second key idea is that if the complex structure moduli are stabilized near a point
in moduli space where a conifold singularity occurs, the compactification can contain a
strongly-warped region, and the presence of an anti-D3-brane in this region can lead to
controllable breaking of supersymmetry.
We will first discuss supersymmetric stabilization, deferring a treatment of anti-D3brane supersymmetry breaking to §4.3.1. For notational simplicity, we will illustrate the
stabilization idea in a hypothetical example with h1,1
+ = 1. Explicit models in actual
Calabi-Yau orientifolds, whose only important difference from the toy model is that they
have multiple Kähler moduli, are presented in §4.1.4, following [80].
Suppose that X6 is a Calabi-Yau threefold with h1,1 = 1, and that O = σΩws (−1)FL is
1,1
an O3/O7 orientifold involution on X6 such that X6 /O has h+
= 1. We denote by T the
Kähler modulus of X6 , and by D the corresponding effective divisor. The Kähler potential
reads
(70)
K ≈ Ktree = −3 log(T + T ) ,
and if D supports a pure N = 1 super-Yang-Mills theory on D7-branes, with gauge group
G, the superpotential is
W = W0 + A(zi , τ )e−2πT /c(G) + . . . .

(71)

If |W0 | ≪ 1, the F-term of the Kähler modulus, as computed with K = Ktree ,
DTtree W = W ∂T Ktree −

2π
A(zi , τ )e−2πT /c(G) ,
c(G)

(72)

then has a zero at a point T ⋆ inside the moduli space,
Re T ⋆ =


c(G)
log |W0 |−1 + . . . ,
2π

(73)

where the omitted corrections, easily obtained from (72), are subleading for W0 ≪ 1.
At T = T ⋆ , the supersymmetry-breaking effects of the flux superpotential Wflux and the
gaugino condensate superpotential Wλλ cancel each other.
For sufficiently small |W0 |, the approximation K ≈ Ktree is consistent at T = T ⋆ , and
there exists a field configuration very near19 zi⋆ , τ ⋆ , T ⋆ at which the F-terms of all moduli
vanish exactly. The resulting solution is an N = 1 supersymmetric AdS4 vacuum in which
all moduli — the Kähler modulus T , the complex structure moduli za , and the axiodilaton
τ — are stabilized.
19

We discuss the small shifts away from zi⋆ , τ ⋆ , T ⋆ in the example of §4.1.4.

21

If any spacetime-filling D3-branes are present, the open string moduli zD3 that measure
their positions inside X6 appear in the Pfaffian A, because 3-7 strings are charged under
G and so affect the gaugino condensate:
W = W0 + A(zi , τ, zD3 )e−2πT /c(G) + . . . .

(74)

At the level of equation counting, this dependence is sufficient to stabilize the D3-brane
positions zD3 : the D3-brane moduli space would have been all of X6 in the absence of
the gaugino condensate superpotential, but the actual moduli space is a set of isolated
points. This has been verified explicitly in toroidal orientifold compactifications and in
certain local models [81]. It also accords with the general expectation that generic N = 1
supergravity theories do not have exact moduli spaces.
We made two crucial assumptions in the above discussion: we supposed that there exists
a consistent choice of quantized flux such that W0 is exponentially small, and we supposed
that the divisor D supports a gaugino condensate on D7-branes. A natural question is
whether there exist actual Calabi-Yau orientifolds, and explicit choices of quantized flux,
that fulfill these conditions and give rise to a supersymmetric AdS4 vacuum. This question
has been resolved in the affirmative by direct construction [80, 82, 83], as we will now
explain.
4.1.1

Mechanism for small flux superpotential

The quantized fluxes F3 and H3 correspond to classes in H 3 (X6 , Z), which can be understood as a lattice of dimension 2h2,1 + 2. A specification of fluxes then corresponds to the
2,1
choice of two lattice vectors f⃗, ⃗h ∈ Z2h +2 . A choice of fluxes carries the D3-brane charge
Z
D3
(75)
Qflux =
H3 ∧ F3 = 21 f⃗ T ·Σ·⃗h .
X6

Thus, not all f⃗, ⃗h are consistent: Gauss’s law (13) limits fluxes to those with QD3
flux no larger
than the negative D3-brane charge of the orientifold planes. Flux vacua thus correspond
to choices of lattice vectors in a bounded region. For large h2,1 , the number of allowed
choices is vast.
The KKLT scenario relies on the existence of fluxes f⃗, ⃗h such that the expectation
value |W0 | of the flux superpotential is exponentially small. Important early work on the
statistics of flux vacua found the expected distribution of |W0 | in the approximation that
the fluxes are continuous [84]. The outcome was that the smallest expected value of |W0 |
could be exponentially small in h2,1 , but that at the same time such flux configurations
were exponentially rare.
For another perspective, (31) shows that the problem of finding small |W0 | is akin
to finding a short vector in a high-dimensional lattice. The shortest vector problem is
a well-known, cryptographically hard problem [85]. This is consistent with a picture in
which finding exponentially small |W0 | may be possible, but would require h2,1 ≫ 1, and
moreover would be exponentially costly [86, 87].20
20

For a counterargument, see [88].

22

This state of affairs appears discouraging, but there is important additional structure
that can be exploited [83]. Length is measured in (31) by pairing with the period vector
⃗ So suppose we can decompose
Π.
⃗ =Π
⃗ poly + Π
⃗ exp ,
Π

(76)

⃗ poly is polynomial and Π
⃗ exp is exponentially small, in a sense we will make precise.
where Π
Then the idea is to find configurations f⃗, ⃗h such that
⃗ poly ≡ 0 ,
(f⃗ − τ ⃗h)T ·Σ·Π

(77)

⃗ In such a case
i.e. flux choices that are automatically orthogonal to the ‘big’ part of Π.
one will have
q
⃗ exp ≪ 1 .
|W0 | = π2 (f⃗ − τ ⃗h)T ·Σ·Π
(78)
To realize this idea, one needs a decomposition of the form of (76), and a means of choosing
fluxes that obey the orthogonality condition (77).
Near the large complex structure (LCS) point in moduli space, the periods automatically obey (76). To see this, we recall that the prepotential F for the complex structure
moduli zi takes the form
F = Fpoly (zi ) + Fexp (zi ) = Fpoly (zi ) −

X
1
i 
GV(β) Li3 e2πic zi .
3
(2πi)
i

(79)

β=c qi

e6 is the threefold that is mirror to X6 ; the sum runs over curve classes β ∈ H2 (X
e6 , Z),
Here X
i
expressed in terms of coefficients c and a basis qi ; GV(β) is the genus-0 Gopakumar-Vafa
invariant of β; Li3 is the trilogarithm; and Fpoly (zi ) is a polynomial of degree three in the
zi . The sum of exponentials corresponds to the contributions of worldsheet instantons in
e6 .
compactification of type IIA string theory on X
As usual in mirror symmetry, the practical approach is to compute F exactly in the
duality frame where it is purely classical geometry: here, that means evaluating the periods
e6 , which reduces to the problem of evaluating (rather elaborate) contour integrals,
of Ω on X
and can be automated. Thus, all the constants appearing in (79) are computable: the
e6 ,
coefficients in Fpoly are determined by the intersection numbers and Chern classes of X
and the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants can be obtained from the mirror map [89].
⃗ to the prepotential, one easily shows that the decomposition
On relating the periods Π
⃗ poly resulting from approximating F ≈ Fpoly , and
(79) implies a decomposition (76), with Π
⃗ exp the correction resulting from the instanton series Fexp .
Π
The orthogonality condition (77) corresponds to a Diophantine equation in the flux
2,1
2,1
integers. To see this, we change variables from f⃗, ⃗h ∈ Z2h +2 to M, K ∈ Zh (see [80] for
details) and define
pi := (κ̃ijk M k )−1 Kj ,
(80)

23

e6 . Then one finds that (77)
where κ̃ijk are the triple intersection numbers of the mirror X
holds for choices of flux obeying
p · K = 0,

with

p ∈ KXe6 ,

(81)

e6 . As always one must also impose the tadpole condition:
where KXe6 is the Kähler cone of X
1
D3
we have − 2 M · K ≡ Qflux , and so M, K are constrained to obey
1
M · K = QD3
loc .
2

(82)

A choice of fluxes obeying (81) and (82), and thus obeying (77), is called a perturbatively
flat vacuum, or PFV. In a PFV, one linear combination of the complex structure moduli
and axiodilaton remains unfixed at the perturbative level (i.e., for F ≈ Fpoly ), while the
h2,1 orthogonal directions are supersymmetrically stabilized by fluxes. We can choose to
parameterize the perturbatively flat direction by τ . The effective superpotential for τ ,
which is dictated by the quantized fluxes and the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants, is a sum of
exponentials:
X


1
2πiτ p·β
M·β GV(β) Li2 e
.
(83)
Weff (τ ) = − 3/2 5/2
2 π
β
In some examples one finds a racetrack structure, where two terms compete in a region of
weak coupling where all other terms are negligible [83].
2,1
For example, there exists an O3/O7 orientifold with h−
= 5 and h1,1
+ = 113, and a
choice of quantized fluxes therein, for which, in the normalizations of [80],
√
7
7
43 
8π 5 Weff (τ ) = −2 e2πiτ · 29 + 252 e2πiτ · 28 + O e2πiτ · 126 .
(84)
The F-term for τ vanishes at τ = τ ⋆ with Im(τ ⋆ ) ≈ 0.011. This example therefore has
an exponentially small flux superpotential [80, 82],
|W0 | = |Weff (τ⋆ )| ≈



2
252

29

≈ 10−61 .

(85)

To recap: by finding fluxes that obey the Diophantine equation (77), one ensures that
in the joint complex structure and axiodilaton moduli space, a single complex field remains
massless at the perturbative level, while all other directions acquire large supersymmetric
masses.21 For the remaining PFV direction τ , the effective superpotential is a sum of
exponentials, and so when a minimum exists at some τ ⋆ , the vev of the superpotential
|W0 | = |Weff (τ⋆ )| is naturally exponentially small. To engineer such a minimum, one can
e6
search through the discrete choices of topology — of X6 and correspondingly its mirror X
— and fluxes f⃗, ⃗h to find a case where Weff is a racetrack, with two terms having nearly
21

For a variation on the PFV setup that allows further structure, see [90], while for a mechanism using
asymptotic Hodge theory, see [91].

24

equal exponents and hierarchical prefactors. Examples of this sort have been found on a
large scale: many billions of PFVs have been identified in Calabi-Yau threefolds [92].
Small values of |W0 | in PFVs are far more prevalent than continuous flux models predict,
and occur at much smaller values of h2,1 , because the smallness of |W0 | does not rely on
searching in a high-dimensional lattice.22 The example of (85) has h2,1 = 5, and it is the
values of the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants and flux integers that dictate the exponential
structure.
In summary, exponentially small values of |W0 | can be found systematically by cone6 ) of Calabistructing PFVs. This relies on computing the topology of mirror pairs (X6 , X
Yau threefolds; computing the periods; finding O3/O7 orientifold projections; and solving
the Diophantine equation (77) in the flux integers. Searching in a high-dimensional lattice
is not required, and so the PFV approach represents a dramatic reduction in complexity.
4.1.2

Non-perturbative superpotential

We now turn to computing the non-perturbative superpotential Wnp for the Kähler moduli,
as defined in (42). In §3.4.2 we explained the conditions under which an effective divisor D
supports a Euclidean D3-brane or gaugino condensate superpotential term. To stabilize all
h1,1
+ Kähler moduli Ta in a compactification, one needs to ensure that there are contributions
to Wnp that depend on each of the Ta .23 Moreover, there are infinitely many candidate
divisors, and to conclusively demonstrate the existence of a vacuum for the Kähler moduli
one must show that the terms that one computes and includes are in fact dominant over
all omitted terms.
To this end, suppose that X6 is a Calabi-Yau orientifold, {Da }, a = 1, . . . , h1,1 is a basis
of H4 (X6 , Z), and {DA }, A = 1, . . . , N ≥ h1,1 is a set of irreducible divisors that generate
the semigroup of effective divisors, i.e. such that every effective divisor D on X6 can be
written as a nonnegative integer linear combination of the DA . We write DA = caA Da with
caA ∈ Z. We can specify a point in the Kähler moduli space of X6 by the complexified
volumes Ta of the Da .
The orientifold action determines which divisors support D7-brane gauge groups. In
favorable classes of compactifications, each O7-plane coincides with exactly four D7-branes,

and gives rise to the gauge algebra so(8), whose dual Coxeter number is c so(8) = 6.
When the associated divisor is rigid in the sense of (37), the low-energy theory is pure glue
super-Yang-Mills and generates a gaugino condensate superpotential. Suppose that on X6 ,
a set D1 , . . . , Dk (k < h1,1 ) of divisors are rigid and support so(8) gauge algebras, while the
remainder of the semigroup generators Dk+1 , . . . , DN are either not wrapped by D7-branes,
or else support non-rigid D7-brane stacks (e.g., with dim H+• (D, OD ) = (1, 0, 1)).
22

The reason for the disparity compared to continuous flux predictions is that quantized fluxes are a set
of measure zero in the space of continuous fluxes, and statements about distributions in the continuous
ensemble only hold up to sets of measure zero [80]. A statistical comparison appears in [93].
23
See [94] for an analysis of the prospects for Kähler moduli stabilization in ensembles of geometries.

25

There very often exists a point Ta⋆ at which
1
1
Re(T1 ) ≈ . . . ≈ Re(Tk ) ≈ Re(Tk+1 ) ≈ . . . ≈ Re(Th1,1 ) ≪ Re(Th1,1 +1 ) , . . . , Re(TN ) .
6
6
(86)
We will call a point obeying (86) a KKLT point.
At a KKLT point Ta = Ta⋆ , Euclidean D3-branes wrapping any of the DA with A ∈
{k + 1, . . . , h1,1 } are hierarchically more important than Euclidean D3-branes wrapping
the DA with A > h1,1 , or wrapping nontrivial linear combinations of the DA . The task
of evaluating the leading Euclidean D3-brane superpotential terms then reduces to the
finite task of counting the fermion zero modes of the DA for A ∈ {k + 1, . . . h1,1 }, i.e. of
computing dim H±i (DA , ODA ) for i = 0, 1, 2.
If all of Dk+1 , . . . , Dh1,1 are rigid and not wrapped by D7-branes, the total superpotential
takes the form
W = Wflux +

k
X
a=1

1,1

Aa (zi , τ, zD3 )e−2πTa /6 +

h
X

a=k+1

Aa (zi , τ, zD3 )e−2πTa + . . .

(87)

where the omitted terms are hierarchically smaller than the terms shown.24
We call (87) a KKLT superpotential. In the special case that all the divisors D1 , . . . , Dh1,1
are not just rigid, but also pure rigid — meaning that their uplifts to divisors of the F-theory
fourfold have trivial intermediate Jacobians — and that the compactification contains no
spacetime-filling D3-branes, the Pfaffian prefactors of the pure rigid superpotential terms
are simply constants Aa , and so we have
W = Wflux +

k
X
a=1

1,1

Aa e

−2πTa /6

+

h
X

a=k+1

Aa e−2πTa + . . .

(88)

The conditions leading to (88) may appear highly restrictive, but compactifications furnishing pure rigid KKLT superpotentials have been found at large h1,1 [80, 92].
In a compactification with a KKLT point Ta⋆ (86) and a KKLT superpotential (87), the
dominant terms in Wnp are exactly those shown in (87). In such a case, the effective theory
for the Kähler moduli Ta is well-approximated by (87) and (46), and the task of stabilizing
the Kähler moduli is purely computational: one needs to check whether a supersymmetric
vacuum exists in a regime of control, at some point Tavac very near Ta⋆ .
4.1.3

Requirements for KKLT vacua

The KKLT scenario for de Sitter vacua requires a Calabi-Yau orientifold flux compactification that fulfills the following criteria:
24
The terms in the Euclidean D(-1)-brane superpotential (43) are no larger than e−πτ , so if gs ≪ 1 and
if Wflux arises from a PFV in which the dominant terms in (83) have p·β < 1/2, we can safely neglect
WED(-1) . Moreover, it was shown in [95] that WED(-1) vanishes identically in the case that all D7-brane
gauge algebras are so(8). See [80], [95] for discussions of this point.

26

a. The fluxes stabilize the complex structure moduli and axiodilaton at a point (z ⋆ , τ ⋆ )
in moduli space where |W0 | is exponentially small.
b. The total superpotential, including non-perturbative terms, takes the form25 (87).
c. The point (z ⋆ , τ ⋆ ) is near a conifold singularity in the moduli space, and the fluxes
threading the conifold give rise to a Klebanov-Strassler [96] throat region.
d. The warp factor and geometry of the throat are such that the inclusion of one or
more anti-D3-branes metastably breaks supersymmetry [97] and leads to a de Sitter
vacuum.
e. The resulting vacuum occurs in a parameter regime where all the approximations
being made are valid: gs ≪ 1; the Kähler moduli are stabilized at a point T ⋆ where
the α′ expansion is under control; and the backreaction effects of D-branes, fluxes,
and orientifolds on the leading-order solution are controllably small.
Conditions (a), (b), and (e) together are sufficient for an N = 1 supersymmetric AdS4
vacuum, while (a), (b), (c) and (e) suffice for an N = 1 supersymmetric AdS4 vacuum
with a conifold region. The further condition (d) is necessary for a de Sitter vacuum.
4.1.4

Explicit constructions

To illustrate the ideas explained above, we will now describe explicit examples of flux compactifications on orientifolds of Calabi-Yau threefolds, with all moduli stabilized, that are
incarnations of the KKLT scenario. We will begin with the case of N = 1 supersymmetric
AdS4 vacua without warped throats [80], i.e. vacua fulfilling (a), (b), and (e).
Suppose that X6 is a Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface in a toric variety obtained from
the Kreuzer-Skarke list. Computational advances summarized in §8 make it possible to
compute intersection numbers [98], O3/O7 orientifold actions [24], the topology of divisors
and their uplifts to F-theory [99,100], and the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants of curves [89] in
e6 . Combined with a choice of quantized fluxes (29), these data suffice to determine
X6 and X
the flux superpotential (31) and the non-perturbative superpotential terms from Euclidean
D3-branes (37) and gaugino condensates (40), so that the full superpotential (41) is known.
In §4.1.1 we described a mechanism for achieving (a): one chooses quantized fluxes
obeying (81) and (82), leading to a PFV whose effective superpotential Weff (τ ) is a sum
of exponentials (83), and selects a case in which the leading terms in (83) compete in a
two-term racetrack [83], so that |W0 | ≪ 1. One can accomplish this in practice for X6 a
Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface with h2,1 ≲ 8.
In §4.1.2 we summarized the zero mode computation that determines the non-perturbative
superpotential for the Kähler moduli, and so allows one to check condition (b). Calabi-Yau
25

A form more general than (87), involving multiple distinct dual Coxeter numbers, would suffice for
the KKLT mechanism, but because examples of (87) exist and are simpler to describe, we will restrict to
them here.

27

threefold hypersurfaces with h1,1 ≫ 1 tend to have many — often h1,1 or h1,1 + 1 — pure
rigid divisors, in which case W takes the KKLT form (88). One can then check whether a
KKLT point Ta⋆ (86) exists in a region of control.26
Examples have been found that fulfill all these conditions, in threefolds with 4 ≤ h2,1 ≤
7 and 51 ≤ h1,1 ≤ 214. In the example of (85), with h2,1 = 5 and h1,1 = 113, the string
coupling is polynomially small, gs ≈ 0.011, and the vacuum energy is proportional to

58
2
≈ 10−122 ,
(89)
252
corresponding to an extraordinary degree of scale separation [80]. Extensive analysis of
the control of corrections due to worldsheet instantons appears in [80], and rests on direct
computation of Gopakumar-Vafa invariants to high degree.27
We now turn to examples with warped throat regions. The condition (c) was studied
in [103,104], and was shown to be compatible with (a): one can extend the PFV mechanism
of [83] to the vicinity of conifolds. Stabilization of the Kähler moduli, condition (b), was
not addressed in [103, 104], though no obstacle to stabilization was identified.
The full set of conditions, (a)-(e), are addressed in [92]: explicit examples have been
found in which (a), (b), and (c) are fulfilled, and (d) and (e) hold to leading order in the
α′ expansion, i.e. omitting α′ corrections [105, 106] to the potential of the anti-D3-brane
in the warped throat. Thus, at leading order in α′ , these configurations are metastable
KKLT de Sitter vacua. We comment on related issues in §4.3.1.
4.1.5

Ten-dimensional description

To understand how a KKLT vacuum can arise from the interplay of localized sources,
fluxes, and the quantum effects of Euclidean D3-branes and gaugino condensates, it is
instructive to obtain a ten-dimensional description of the solution, as originally proposed
in [107], and to compare this with the EFT that has been determined from general studies
in non-perturbative supersymmetric field theory [108–111]. A consistent ten-dimensional
configuration should agree with the four-dimensional results.
Gaugino condensation is a four-dimensional effect, but in string compactifications the
gaugino bilinear expectation value ⟨λλ⟩ can be computed in the four-dimensional theory
and included as a source term localized on D7-branes. This requires knowing the couplings
of D7-brane gauginos to bulk fields [112, 113], such as
Z
√
g G3 ·Ω λ̄λ̄ ,
(90)
L⊃c
D

26
Furthermore, one can systematically incorporate the leading corrections to the condition (73). These
corrections, which result from the finite size of 1/|W0 |, and also from the α′3 and worldsheet instanton
contributions to the Kähler potential and Kähler coordinates inherited from the parent N = 2 compactification, can all be computed explicitly [80].
27
String loop corrections to the Kähler potential have not been computed explicitly in the examples
of [80], but their effects are parametrically suppressed at weak coupling and large volume, and so will be
negligible in the vacua of [80] unless there are accidental enhancements by many orders of magnitude.
Advances in computing string loop corrections to the Kähler potential appear in [101, 102].

28

where c is a constant and D is the divisor wrapped by the D7-branes. Setting λ̄λ̄ → ⟨λ̄λ̄⟩ =
̸
0, the coupling (90) becomes a source term for G3 that is localized on D.
One can then seek a solution of the ten-dimensional supergravity equations of motion
with these localized sources. The appropriate framework is compactification on manifolds
with dynamic SU(2) structure [114]: the gaugino condensate sources a localized deviation
away from the conformally Calabi-Yau solution of the classical theory [107, 113, 115, 116],
including IASD flux profiles.
sol.
obtained from the tenConsistency requires that the four-dimensional curvature R10d
4
EFT
dimensional equations of motion should match the curvature R4 obtained from the fourdimensional Einstein equations equipped with the KKLT scalar potential obtained from
(21),(71). The undertaking of precisely matching the ten-dimensional and four-dimensional
sol.
results by computing R10d
and comparing to REFT
was initiated in [117] and pursued
4
4
in [118–122]. Essential data for making this comparison comes from the ten-dimensional
supersymmetry conditions (i.e., Killing spinor equations) that account for the gaugino
condensate: these conditions were proposed in [107], building on [114], and further studied
in [123].
It was shown in [124] and [125] that the supersymmetry conditions of [107] do not
provide a consistent representation of the gaugino condensate. The corrected Killing spinor
equations necessary for consistency were obtained in [124] at leading order in ⟨λλ⟩, and
then in general in [125]. Equipped with the corrected supersymmetry conditions, [124]
found an exact match,
sol.
R10d
= REFT
,
(91)
4
4
which is strong evidence that the ten-dimensional solution is a consistent representation of
the four-dimensional effective theory. The question of localized divergences in this setting
remains open [125, 126].

4.2

LVS

We reviewed in §3.5.1 that the tree-level effective theory in type IIB flux compactifications
has no-scale structure, cf. (55), and so the Kähler moduli Ta are unstabilized at tree level.
Dependence of the scalar potential on the Kähler moduli arises from corrections to the
tree-level data,
W = Wtree + δW ,
K = Ktree + δK .
(92)
Recalling the general form (20), we have δW = Wnp and δK = Kpert. + Knp , and as
before we use W0 to denote the expectation value of Wtree in the supersymmetric vacuum
configuration of the complex structure moduli and axiodilaton.
Including the corrections δK and δW in the scalar potential will lift the original flatness
of the potential:
V = VδK + VδW + . . .
(93)
The tree-level contribution proportional to |W0 |2 vanishes thanks to the no-scale property
(55), and the corrections due to δK and δW are of order:
VδK ∼ |W0 |2 δK,

VδW ∼ |W0 | δW + (δW )2 .
29

(94)

V

I

II

III

T

Figure 1: A plot of V vs ⌧ for the scalar potential V = U(ln ⌧ )/⌧ 4 , revealing a de Sitter or anti-de
Figure
1: The
Dine-Seiberg
largemaximum.
volumes The
and plots
weakare
coupling
scalar
Sitter
minimum
separated
from a problem.
runaway byFor
a local
obtainedthe
using
the
potential
runs
away
towards
the
infinite
volume
or
zero
coupling
limit.
Region
III
is
the
representative values k1 /k3 = 0.01 and k2 /k3 = 0.133 (arbitrary scale). The main text describes the
regionparameter
in which range
calculations
can be
arbitrarily
well controlled.
The natural place
precise
requiredintothe
getEFT
de Sitter
rather
than anti-de
Sitter or a runaway.
to find a minimum, if one exists, is in region I, since it is here that quantum effects could
most readily counterbalance the leading-order runaway behaviour. Obtaining a minimum
in the physically interesting region II, with finitely large volume and weak coupling, is more
challenging
and
extra
of hierarchies.
of such
hierarchies
areone
those
where
U1 = 3k
|w0 |2 and
so sources
on. Furthermore,
theExamples
Dine-Seiberg
argument
leads
to
1 b1requires
achieved
by
a
choice
of
fluxes
in
the
KKLT
scenario,
or
by
competition
of
perturbative
and
expect that any minima ⌧ = ⌧0 of this potential generically occur in the regime where ↵(⌧0 ) ⇠
non-perturbative terms in LVS.

O(1). But if stabilization of other moduli make ↵g0 small, then inspection of (2.10) shows
that ⌧0 must be very large because ↵g0 ln ⌧0 ' O(1).
This
argument
can be of
made
explicit
perturbative
we
One general
would like
to find regions
moduli
spacepurely
whereusing
the portions
of VδKmethods
and VδW ifthat
28
arrange
that the coefficients
U1 , Uto2 and
U3 aappearing
the potential
(2.6)
with potential.
U given by
are computable
actually suffice
ensure
controlledinminimum
for the
moduli
The possible
hierarchies
that will
relevant
are then29
(2.11)
are all positive
and satisfy
thebemild
hierarchy
|WU0 | ∼ δW
U2≫ δK ,
1
⇠ δK ∼⇠δW
O(✏)
|WU0 | ≫
,
U3
2
|W0 | ≫ δK ≫ δW .

(95)
(2.12)
(96)
(97)

for some smallish ✏ ⌧ 1. Such a hierarchy allows solutions to @V /@⌧ |⌧0 = 0 for ↵0 ⇠ O(✏)
We have already discussed (95): the KKLT scenario relies on choosing fluxes such that
and
δWso∼ |W |. In this case V ∼ |W |2 δK ≪ V
∼ |W |2 , and so we can neglect the
0

28

δK

0

b1 ln ⌧0 = ↵g01

δW

✏ 1

0

(2.13)

Computing Knp systematically is currently out of reach, so we will only study regions where δK ≈
Kpert. , and we therefore omit Knp henceforth.
< 1/10
can 29easily
be order
1/✏(96)
if ✏could
⌧ ↵be
andnot
b1 as
< two
0. For
✏⇠
the value
predicted
for ⌧0 can
be
g0 seen
The cases
(95) and
alternative
scenarios,
but instead
as different
regimes
for exploring
the 1/✏
same
class of models,
in the sense
that
of valuesexofpost
the flux
superpotential
enormous
⌧0 ⇠
, justifying
the validity
of the
1/⌧a scan
expansion
facto.
As is easycan
to
4
smoothly interpolate
from
one
class
to
the
other,
as
was
shown
in
the
example
of
CP
[1,
1,
1, 6, 9] in [127].
2

check, when 9 U2 > 32 U1 U3 the potential has a local minimum at ⌧0 that is separated from
the runaway to ⌧ ! 1 by a local maximum at30⌧1 > ⌧0 (see Fig. 1).
The value of the potential at this minimum is positive if U22 < 4 U1 U3 and negative
otherwise. Although (2.11) and (2.12) might naively lead one to expect U(⌧0 ) ⇠ O(✏4 ) when

corrections δK. The leading-order contribution to the scalar potential VδW can then give
rise to a minimum, as we explained in §4.1.
However, because δK is polynomial in inverse volumes 1/Ta , whereas δW ≡ Wnp is
exponential in volumes, it is arguably more natural to suppose that δK ≳ δW . That is,
although we showed explicitly in §4.1.4 that one can find configurations obeying (95) and
stabilizing all moduli, one might expect (96) and (97) to occur more often in the landscape
of flux vacua.
Stabilization achieved exclusively through perturbative corrections to K, as in (97), is
an interesting possibility explored in [128]. For weak coupling and large volumes the first
non-vanishing term in the perturbative expansion will dominate, giving rise to a runaway
potential and therefore no non-trivial minima at weak coupling. This is the celebrated
Dine-Seiberg problem (see Figure 1).
To avoid this outcome in the regime (97), one would need to understand δK well enough
to engineer a competition between two or more terms that suffices to stabilize all moduli
in a region of control. This difficult task has not yet been achieved.30
We now turn to the more fruitful case (96), in which δK and δW are in competition.
The main point is that the generic Calabi-Yau manifold has many Kähler moduli. One
combination of the moduli gives the volume V that controls the overall α′ expansion.
However, as we have seen, each of the Kähler moduli may be an expansion parameter:
a
Euclidean D3-branes on a rigid four-cycle D with Vol(D) = ca τa give δW ∼ e−2πc τa . If
a
W0 = O(1) we have VδK ∼ δK and VδW ∼ δW . So if δK ∼ 1/V and δW ∼ e−2πc τa the
scalar potential may develop a minimum where δK ∼ δW , i.e. at
a

V ∼ e2πc τa ,

(98)

and for τa ≫ 1 the volume V will be exponentially large in the minimum. This is the origin
of the name Large Volume Scenario (LVS) [129, 130].
Let us now be more explicit. Following our discussion of perturbative corrections to
the Kähler potential in §3.5.2, we consider the leading-order α′ correction at string tree
level: this is the α′3 correction of [66], cf. (63):


3/2 !
 Z


ξ τ −τ
, (99)
Kα′3 = − ln −i
Ω(zi ) ∧ Ω(z̄i ) − ln −i(τ − τ̄ ) − 2 ln V +
2
2i
X6
where
ξ=−

ζ(3)χ(X6 )
.
2(2π)3

(100)

30
An interesting perturbative approach to moduli stabilization was outlined recently in [78]. There is a
concrete case in QFT in which a perturbation expansion can be re-summed: as is well-known, the renormalization group provides logarithmic corrections to the EFT. For string moduli these are re-summations
in an expansion in α log V, with α a weak coupling parameter. Following the Dine-Seiberg logic, this
structure would naturally lead to a minimum in which the expansion parameter is O(1), which would
imply V ∼ e1/α ≫ 1. This would be an alternative way to fix the volume modulus consistent with weak
coupling, and would naturally lead to exponentially large volumes. It would be very interesting to achieve
explicit string realizations of this scenario.

31

Here χ(X6 ) is the Euler number of the corresponding Calabi-Yau manifold and ζ is the
Riemann ζ function. N = 1 corrections to the Kähler potential, yet to be computed, are
expected to modify this coefficient.
The simple modification (99) of the Kähler potential changes the structure of the scalar
potential, once it is combined with the flux plus non-perturbative superpotential (41),
n
X
a
W = W0 +
Aa e−2πc Ta
(101)
a=1

where the index a runs over all effective divisors, with the understanding that Aa may
vanish for some of them if the corresponding cycle is not rigid. Thus, n may be smaller
than, equal to, or larger than h1,1 , depending on the threefold in question.
The leading-order scalar potential is positive-definite in the dilaton and complex structure moduli directions, and therefore to leading order these fields are stabilized by the
fluxes, as in KKLT, at Dzi W = 0 and Dτ W = 0.
The remaining potential as a function of the Kähler moduli reads:

i
h
 
V = eK KTa K Ta T b W W T b + WTa K Ta T b W Tb + KTb W + KTa K Ta T b KTb − 3 |W |2 .
(102)
Inserting the expressions (101) and (99) in (102), the scalar potential can be written as a
sum of three terms (quadratic, linear and independent of W0 , respectively) [131],
V = Vα′3 + Vnp1 + Vnp2 ,
where:
Vα′3
Vnp1

(103)



3ξˆ V 2 + 7V ξˆ + ξˆ2
= eK |W0 |2 × 

2 ,
ˆ
ˆ
V − ξ 2V + ξ
X

2 |Aa | e−ca τa cos ba θa − ϕa + θW
= eK |W0 | ×
a




2
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
+ 4ξ
3ξ V + 7ξV + ξ 
 4V +ξV

 ca τ a + 
× 

2  ,
ˆ
ˆ
V − ξˆ 2V + ξˆ
V − ξ 2V + ξ

Vnp2 = eK

X



a,b

|Aa | |Ab | e−(ca τa +cb τb ) cos ca θa − cb θb − ϕa + ϕb


ˆ
 
ˆ (κabc tc ) ca cb + 4V − ξ (ca τa ) (cb τb )
×
−
4V
+
2
ξ

V − ξˆ

(104)

(105)




ˆ +ξ 
3ξˆ V + 7ξV
ˆ + 4ξˆ2
4V 2 + ξV

 (ca τa + cb τb ) + 
+

2 
.
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
V − ξ 2V + ξ
V − ξ 2V + ξ


32

2

ˆ2

(106)

3/2

Here ξˆ := ξ/gs , and ϕa and θW are the phases of Aa and W0 , respectively.
ˆ for ξˆ < 0, but
The scalar potential (103) is singular at V = ξˆ for ξˆ > 0 and V = −ξ/2
ˆ
in any case validity of the perturbative expansion requires V ≫ ξ, so these singularities
will not be relevant. In general the domain of validity of the scalar potential is also limited
by the fact that the Kähler moduli need to lie in the Kähler cone.
The first term (104) vanishes as ξ → 0, as it should in order to recover the tree-level
result in this case. For V ≫ ξˆ we see from (99) that eK scales as 1/V 2 , so the first term
(104) scales as 1/V 3 , whereas (105) and (106) scale as 1/V 2 and 1/V, respectively, but
also depend on powers of e−τa , making the moduli stabilization calculation very rich. An
important technical point is that Vnp2 depends explicitly on the two-cycle moduli ta , and in
general it is not possible to determine ta (τb ) analytically. In practical terms it is therefore
easier to consider the scalar potential as a function of the ta fields.
The formula (104) is very general and holds for any number of moduli.31 Let us consider
key illustrative cases:
• h1,1 = 1. This is the simplest case considered by KKLT. Here there is only one Kähler
modulus, T1 , and one triple intersection number κ111 := k. We assume that there is
a non-perturbative contribution, i.e. we take n = h1,1 = 1, and
r
1 2
1 2 3/2,
1 3
W = W0 + Ae−cT1 .
τ1 = kt1 ,
V=
τ1
(107)
V = kt ,
6
2
3 k
Since it is possible to express V as a function of τ1 we can work with the variable τ1 .
Equation (103) reproduces the KKLT potential for ξˆ = 0.


9akgs eKcs
|A| −cτ1
−cτ1
|A| e
e
V =
|W0 | cos(cθ1 + θW − ϕ1 ) +
(cτ1 + 3)
(108)
τ12
3
which reproduces the supersymmetric AdS minimum of KKLT. Non-vanishing values
of ξˆ add corrections to the KKLT potential that have been considered in [133], and
that can contribute to uplifting the original AdS minimum. Since there is only one
Kähler modulus there is no LVS minimum.
• h1,1 = 2. This is the simplest case allowing an LVS minimum. Depending on the
nature of the divisors and the triple intersection numbers, the volume may or may
not be expressed explicitly in terms of the variables τ1 and τ2 . Also in this case we
may or may not have non-perturbative dependence of W on both moduli (n = 1, 2).
If n = 2 this allows a generalization of KKLT for two moduli. If n = 1 the second
modulus needs to be stabilized by perturbative effects.
The simplest example has X6 an orientifold of the Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface
in weighted projective space CP4 [1, 1, 1, 6, 9]. In this case,
t2
τ1 = 1 ,
2

(t1 + 6t2 )2
τ2 =
,
2

3/2

6V = 3t21 t2 + 18t1 t22 + 36t32 = τ2

31

3/2

− τ1

. (109)

Here we have neglected the orientifold-odd moduli. A more general expression including these moduli
can be found in [132].

33

The scalar potential for V ≫ ξˆ takes the form:


√
α
βτ2 e−c1 τ1 cos (c1 θ1 + θW − ϕ1 ) γ τ1 e−2c1 τ1
Kcs
V ≃ gs e
+
+
V3
V2
V

(110)

where

4
3ξˆ |W0 |2
(111)
,
β = 2|A| |W0 | c1 ,
γ = c21 |A|2 .
4
3
Extremizing with respect to θ1 sets the cosine term to −1, and then extremizing
with respect to τ1 and the volume V (or τ2 ) gives rise to exponentially large volume
if α > 0 (i.e., if the Euler characteristic χ(X6 ) is negative):
α=

3/2

⟨V⟩ ≃ ⟨τ2 ⟩ ≃ ec1 τ1 ,

⟨τ1 ⟩ ≃

ξ 2/3
≫ 1.
gs

(112)

Here we considered only the case n = 1, without non-perturbative superpotential
dependence on τ2 . This is justified for the hypersurface in CP4 [1, 1, 1, 6, 9] since
the divisor with volume τ2 is not rigid. The presence of fluxes may modify this
conclusion and give rise to non-perturbative contributions (see for instance [134]).
In any case, such terms are highly suppressed compared to the 1/V dependence and
can be neglected.
The above vacuum is the prototypical example of LVS. In this example, it was essential that the volume took the form
3/2

V ∝ τ2

3/2

− τ1

,

(113)

so that V decreases as τ1 increases. Since the cycle of volume τ1 behaves like a hole
in X6 , volumes V with the structure (113) are said to be of Swiss cheese form. The
generalization to more than two Kähler moduli is
V ∝ F (τã ) − G(τâ )

(114)

where we have split the moduli τa into two classes, τã and τâ , and F and G are positive
homogeneous functions of degree 3/2 of their arguments, such that the volume V
decreases with increasing τâ . In the case (113), the corresponding divisor corresponds
to a del Pezzo surface that can be shrunk to zero size without affecting the positivity
of the volume.
When G is given by
G=

X

3/2

τâ

,

(115)

â

then the shrinking divisors are called diagonal del Pezzo surfaces. Although the form
(115) appears to be quite special, it is common at h1,1 = 2, appearing in 22 out of 39

34

Calabi-Yau threefolds from the Kreuzer-Skarke list at h1,1 = 2 [131].32 Furthermore,
this structure can easily be generalized to the h1,1 > 2 cases.
In the models with h1,1 = 2 for which the Swiss cheese structure is not present,
equation (103) remains applicable. A systematic analysis of all the models with
h1,1 = 2 in the Kreuzer-Skarke list shows that seven additional models may give rise
to LVS minima even though they lack diagonal del Pezzo divisors. In these cases
it is more convenient to extremize the scalar potential with respect to the two-cycle
moduli ta . The remaining 10 models with h1,1 = 2 correspond to K3 or T 4 fibrations
over P1 . In these cases the volume modulus is linear in one of the ta moduli and can
√
be written as V ∼ τ1 τ2 . These cases do not give rise to LVS vacua .
• h1,1 = 3. Again formula (103) may be used to identify vacua in which all the moduli
are stabilized. There are again extensions of KKLT and LVS vacua. Out of 305
different Calabi-Yau orientifolds more than 120 allow for LVS minima, either by
3/2
3/2
3/2
having a Swiss cheese structure V = τ3 − τ2 − τ1 , or a slightly modified form
3/2
3/2
V = τ3 − (ατ2 + βτ1 )3/2 − τ1 .

The case of h1,1 = 3 illustrates much richer structure than the previous cases. A
substantial fraction of models cannot be minimized in terms of the τa and one needs
to minimize (104) with respect to the ta . Even though analytic results are difficult
to extract, numerical analysis is enough to identify minima, several of them of the
LVS type. This illustrates that there are more LVS minima than naively expected.
Some of these models have one rigid divisor, such as a del Pezzo surface, while the
third modulus is a K3 fibration modulus that is not fixed at this order of perturbation
theory, and whose fixing relies on higher-order corrections (such as those discussed
in §3.5.2) that scale with higher powers of 1/V, for example as δV ∼ O(V −10/3 ).
These fibrations allow for interesting anisotropic compactifications [137] in which
two of the dimensions are much larger than the other four. The flatness of the fiber
moduli potentials has also been used as one of the leading models for string moduli
inflation [138]: see §6.2.

• h1,1 ≥ 4. Cases with larger numbers of Kähler moduli have been less systematically
explored, mostly due to computational limitations (however, see §8), but they are
all captured by formula (103). In cases where there are n < h1,1 rigid divisors, the
existence of an isolated vacuum relies on understanding higher-order perturbative
corrections to the Kähler potential.
The structures that appeared at small h1,1 , such as the appearance of del Pezzo
surfaces and fiber moduli, continue at larger h1,1 : in fact, it is known that most
Calabi-Yau manifolds are fibrations [139–142]. LVS minima are currently limited to
h1,1 < h2,1 , which sets a bound on the exploration of these vacua.
32

Only 27 of the 39 examples are topologically inequivalent, according to the systematic counting of
inequivalent threefolds in the Kreuzer-Skarke list in [135, 136].

35

4.3

Supersymmetry breaking and de Sitter uplift

The vacua with stabilized moduli that we have described so far are AdS4 solutions: these
are N = 1 supersymmetric in the case of KKLT, and non-supersymmetric in the case of
LVS. The uplift paradigm [79] proposes that from an AdS4 solution with V = VAdS < 0,
one can incorporate a source of supersymmetry breaking such that
V → Vtot = VAdS + Vup

(116)

has a metastable de Sitter minimum.
1,1
Let us illustrate the idea in the simple example of a KKLT model with h+
= 1, as in
§4.1. In the supersymmetric AdS4 vacuum, the F-term potential (21) is
VAdS = VF = −3eKtree |W |2 + . . . ,

(117)

with W given by (71), T obeying (73), and the omitted terms representing higher corrections that can be neglected for |W0 | ≪ 1.
The first idea for an uplift, due to Kachru, Pearson, and Verlinde (KPV) [97], proposes
that p anti-D3-branes at the bottom of a Klebanov-Strassler warped throat region can
break supersymmetry, with33
D TD3
Vup =
> 0,
(118)
(T + T )2
where
D = 2p e4A(yIR ) .

(119)

Here TD3 is the D3-brane tension, yIR is the location of the tip of the warped throat inside
X6 , and eA(y) is the warp factor from (22), evaluated in the Klebanov-Strassler solution [96].
The exponential smallness of the warp factor ensures that the supersymmetry breaking
effect is small in string units, i.e. D ≪ 1.
For suitable values of D, the total potential for T ,
VKKLT := VAdS + Vup ,

(120)

with VAdS given by (117) and Vup given by (118), has a metastable de Sitter minimum at
a point T = T dS . With T ⋆ the minimum (73) obtained from (117) alone, one finds that



dS
⋆
⋆
−1
T − T = O 1/T = O 1/ log |W0 |
≪ 1,
(121)

so the Kähler modulus shifts by a small amount toward larger volume.
We remark that the expression (120) arose from asserting that the F-term potential
VAdS and the anti-D3-brane energy Vup combine by simple addition. This is easily argued
to be a good approximation in the four-dimensional EFT [79], and the ten-dimensional
33

The denominator was given as (T + T )3 in [79] and corrected to (T + T )2 , which properly accounts
for the warping, in [143]: see the treatment in [144].

36

computations summarized in §4.1.5 provide independent evidence from a very different
perspective [124].
The expressions (118) and (119) for the anti-D3-brane potential were obtained at leading order in α′ by KPV [97]. At this level of approximation, explicit flux compactifications
furnishing candidates for KKLT de Sitter vacua have been obtained in [92] (cf. [145]).
These vacua are built on the PFV mechanism reviewed in §4.1.1 and the resulting framework for supersymmetric AdS4 vacua described in §4.1.4. However, computations of α′
corrections to the KPV potential [105, 106] indicate that in order to realize metastable de
Sitter vacua that survive α′ corrections, the curvature of the throat region must fulfill a
condition that is more stringent than that assumed in KPV and achieved in [92].
4.3.1

Anti-D3-branes

Before we describe other ideas for sources of supersymmetry-breaking uplifts (in §4.3.3),
we will summarize the status of anti-D3-brane supersymmetry breaking.
The analysis of KPV relied on treating the anti-D3-brane as a probe of the KlebanovStrassler geometry, and subsequent work pursued a backreacted solution [146, 147]. The
consistency of the KPV proposal was questioned in [148], on the basis that the linearized
solution produced by anti-D3-branes smeared on the S 3 has singularities resulting from
three-form fluxes. Dymarsky obtained an SU (2) × SU (2)-invariant linearized solution with
appropriate boundary conditions [149] (see also [150,151]), showed that the ADM mass and
the Coulomb potential for a D3-brane matched the probe computations [143], and further
argued that the singularities in the fluxes were artifacts of linearization. Singularities and
polarization were studied in e.g. [144, 152, 153], and the effective field theory description
of antibrane sources was used in [154, 155] to argue that instabilities are absent. It was
then shown in [156, 157] (see also [158]) that the singularities were a consequence of the
ansatz being too restrictive, and not allowing the polarized brane. The blackfold formalism
was applied in [159] to study the anti-D3-brane in a broader region of parameter space,
including finite temperature, and the results gave strong evidence for consistency of the
metastable KPV state (see also [160–162]).
A further issue arises in KKLT models as a result of the fine-tuning needed to achieve
a de Sitter uplift [120, 163]. For the anti-D3-brane energy (118) to fall in the range such
that (120) has a metastable minimum with positive vacuum energy, one needs the warp
factor in (119) to obey
e4A(yIR ) ∼ |W0 |2 .
(122)
throat
The warp factor can be expressed in terms of the D3-brane charge ND3
and the curvature
radius Rthroat at the tip of the throat as [17]
!
throat
N
8π
D3
,
(123)
e4A(yIR ) = exp −
4
3 Rthroat

while at the KKLT point Ta⋆ the Kähler moduli and W0 are related by (73), i.e.

ca
Re Ta⋆ =
log |W0 |−1 ,
2π
37

(124)

with ca the dual Coxeter number for the gauge group on Di . Because ca ∈ {1, 6} in all the
examples of §4.1.4, and 6 is not a large number for the considerations at hand, we will set
ca → 1 to simplify the discussion. Combining the relations (122), (123), and (124), and
requiring Rthroat ≳ 1 so that the supergravity description of the throat is valid, we find
throat
ND3
≳ Re Ta⋆ .

(125)

The observation made in [120] and further investigated in [163] is that for some compactification geometries X6 , (125) implies that the warp factor eA becomes negative in the bulk
of X6 , rather than just becoming negative in an exponentially small neighborhood of the
O7-planes, where supergravity is in any case not the appropriate description. This issue is
called the singular bulk problem [163].
Whether the singular bulk problem is present in a given X6 depends on how the overall
volume V and the four-cycle volumes are related. Roughly speaking, V controls the size
of the throat that can fit into X6 without causing warp factor singularities to appear
(see [120, 163, 164] for a precise statement). Taking the volumes to be related by
V = P (Re Ta⋆ )3/2 ,

(126)

with P a constant, one can check that if P is of order unity, the singular bulk problem is
severe [120, 163].
Taking P ∼ 1 is a reasonable first guess for a highly isotropic Calabi-Yau threefold,
but given an explicit compactification one can simply compute P at the KKLT point Ta⋆ .
In the example given in (89) of §4.1.4, one finds P ≈ 8000 [80]. The large value of P is a
geometric fact about four-cycle sizes at KKLT points in threefolds with many moduli —
cf. (198) — that very significantly ameliorates the singular bulk problem. This mechanism
persists in de Sitter configurations: in the vacua of [92], in which the fine-tuning (122) is
explicitly engineered and a de Sitter uplift occurs at leading order in α′ , the singular bulk
problem is again alleviated by geometric factors.
4.3.2

Non-linear supersymmetry and nilpotent superfields

In order to study anti-D3-brane supersymmetry breaking, it is sometimes useful to repackage the supersymmetry-breaking effects in terms of a nilpotent chiral superfield X (see for
instance [165–168]):
X = X0 +

√

X 2 = 0 =⇒ X0 =

2ψθ + F θθ,

ψψ
.
2F

(127)

The only propagating component of X is the fermion ψ, which is identified with the
goldstino of nonlinearly-realized supersymmetry. The nilpotent constraint substantially
limits the possible X dependence of the superpotential and Kähler potential to be
W = W0 + ρX,

K = K0 + K1 X + K 1 X + K2 XX ,

38

(128)

with W0 , ρ, Ki functions of the other fields. In the case of a single Kähler modulus T ,


−λ
K0 = −3 log T + T , so in an expansion in 1/ T + T we can write34 K2 = T + T
,
so that the scalar potential takes the general form:
V = V0 + VX ,

−1
VX = KXX

∂W
∂X

2

=

|ρ|2
3−λ ,
T +T

(129)

with V0 the KKLT or LVS scalar potential. Notice that modular weight λ = 1 corresponds to a Kähler potential of the no-scale type, K = −3 log T + T − XX , and also
for λ = 1 we have VX = Vup . This implies that the nilpotent superfield formalism naturally captures the effects of an anti-D3-brane. In sum, the Volkov-Akulov formalism of
nonlinearly-realized supersymmetry provides a convenient representation of anti-D3-brane
supersymmetry breaking.
Explicit orientifold compactifications have been found in which the spectrum of the
anti-D3-brane at the tip of a throat consists of only the goldstino field, with the nilpotent
superfield formalism describing the goldstino EFT couplings [168–170]: see also [171–174].
4.3.3

Other uplifting mechanisms

Anti-D3-brane uplifting has been the best-studied mechanism to break supersymmetry in
KKLT and to uplift the supersymmetric vacuum to a de Sitter vacuum. However, many
other proposals exist, of which we will highlight a few.35
• Uplift from α′ corrections. The α′3 corrections to the Kähler potential given in
(99) contribute
ξ |W0 |2
,
ξ ∝ −χ(X6 ) .
(130)
Vα′3 =
V3
For ξ > 0 (which, in light of mirror symmetry, holds in half of all Calabi-Yau manifolds, setting aside cases with χ = 0) this term contributes positively to the KKLT
potential and may lift the minimum towards de Sitter. The main issue is control of
the approximation: the term (130) needs to compete with lower-order terms present
in the KKLT potential. For LVS the term (130) is responsible for the original nonsupersymmetric AdS minimum. But scanning over different values of the flux superpotential, from the very small values required for KKLT to order O(1 − 100) as
appears in the original LVS, other minima appear in different regimes, some of them
with positive vacuum energy. However, although the volume is relatively large, it is
usually not large enough for the approximations to be trusted [127]. For concrete
examples of this mechanism see for instance [133, 134, 176, 177].
34

This can be also argued in terms of the SL(2, R) modular symmetry T → (aT − ib) / (icT + d), if X
transforms as a modular form of weight λ.
35
An alternative to the uplifts discussed here was proposed in [175]: quantum effects from the Standard
Model sector may uplift an AdS vacuum with sufficiently small vacuum energy.

39

• D-term uplift. The scalar potential for N = 1 supersymmetric theories has two
contributions: the F-term potential (21) that we have been considering so far, and
the D-term potential resulting from integrating out the D-term of a gauge superfield
V̂ α :
1
V = VF + VD ,
VD = Dα Dα .
(131)
2
Here
G = K + log |W |2 ,
(132)
Dα = iGm Xαm ,
and Xαm define the Killing vectors such that under a gauge transformation the matter
fields ψm transform as δψ m = Xαm ϵα . For linearly-realized gauge symmetry, Xαm =
k
(−iTα )m
k ψ .

Since the D-term potentials are manifestly positive, unlike F-terms, it is natural to
inquire if they can be used for de Sitter uplift [30]. In generic orientifold constructions,
D-terms that can potentially lead to de Sitter vacua can be identified. The point is
that the O7-plane fixed loci carry D7-brane charge and so require the presence of D7branes to cancel D7-brane tadpoles. Stacks of D7-branes wrapping a divisor Da host
a corresponding gauge theory, with gauge coupling ga determined by ⟨Re Ta ⟩ = 1/ga2 .
The D7-brane Chern-Simons coupling
Z
iF
(133)
C4 ∧ Tr e 2π
M8

gives rise to a B̂ ∧ F term in four dimensions, with B̂µν ∝ Cµνmn , after expanding the
exponential and turning on magnetic fluxes ⟨F mn ⟩ =
̸ 0, m, n = 4, . . . , 7. The B̂ ∧ F
term, in turn, leads to the cross term of a Stückelberg Lagrangian (Aµ + ∂µ a)2 ,
with a the axion component of Ta (dual to the antisymmetric tensor in the sense
that ∂ µ a = ϵµνρσ ∂ν B̂ρσ ), which implies that the Kähler potential K depends on the
combination T + T + q V̂ . This Kähler potential gives rise to a (field-dependent)
Fayet-Iliopoulos (FI) D-term proportional to ∂K/∂ V̂ V̂ =0 . This can be seen as the
modulus Ta having a charge q under the corresponding U (1) symmetry.
In general, FI terms ξF I contribute to a U (1) D-term potential as:
VD ∝

ξF I −

X
m

qm Km φm

!2

,

(134)

where qm are the charges of matter fields φm . Since VD is positive-definite, the Dterm potential (134) may uplift the F-term scalar potential unless the minimum of
(134) occurs at VD = 0.
Unfortunately, as can be seen from (132), in supergravity the vanishing of the F-term
(Fm ∝ Dm W ) implies the vanishing of the D-term. So the D-term uplift mechanism
does not work for KKLT [178, 179], since the AdS vacuum is supersymmetric. This
40

mechanism may work in LVS since in that case the AdS vacuum is not supersymmetric, and so the F-term is non-zero. In explicit string realizations the D7-branes
support not just gauge fields but also matter fields,36 naturally leading to the T-brane
mechanism that we discuss next (see also [181, 182] for related approaches).
• T-brane uplift. If supersymmetry is broken, the dependence of the scalar potential
on the matter fields φm will include not only the D-term contribution VD but also
the contribution from soft supersymmetry breaking terms, such as scalar masses:
X
Vsoft =
m2n |φn |2 .
(135)
n

Then minimizing the potential VD + Vsoft with respect to φn will lead to a positive
contribution to the overall scalar potential, since both terms cannot vanish simultaneously. The resulting positive energy can cause uplifting, with Vup ∼ |W0 |2 /V 8/3 [183].
In this sense the uplifting comes from a combination of D-terms and F-terms.
This mechanism has an interesting string theory realization in terms of magnetic and
three-form fluxes as well as T-branes [183]. T-branes are D-brane configurations or
bound states defined by the fact that the Higgs fields Φ in the adjoint representation of
the brane non-abelian gauge group, written in a matrix form, are not diagonalizable.
Thus [Φ, Φ† ] ̸= 0, and Φ can be written not in a diagonal but in a triangular form,
hence the term T-brane [184–186].
The eight-dimensional equations of motion for an orientifolded stack of N D7-branes
are:


J ∧ F − Φ, Φ† = 0 ,
(136)

where J is the pullback of the Kähler form, the two-form flux is F = (2πα′ ) F − ι∗ B
with ι∗ B the pullback of the NS-NS B-field, and Φ is the scalar field in the adjoint
representation of the corresponding U (N ) gauge group. Equation (136) corresponds
to the four-dimensional D-term equation with Φ the canonically-normalized
field. If

the flux F is non-primitive, i.e. if J ∧ F ̸= 0, then Φ, Φ† ̸= 0, and hence Φ cannot
be a diagonal matrix. On the other hand, a triangular matrix satisfies this condition,
thus defining the D-brane configuration as a T-brane.
Furthermore the non-vanishing (0, 3) fluxes break supersymmetry, and the soft masses
m2 |Φ|2 can be computed explicitly from the D7-brane DBI action, leading to a stringy
realization of the T-brane uplift scenario [183].

• Complex structure moduli uplift. As we have seen, the complex structure moduli
part of the scalar potential Vcs is positive semi-definite. It is then naturally minimized
at the supersymmetric point Dzi = 0 with Vcs = 0. However, considering the full
scalar potential and knowing that Vcs is also a function of the Kähler moduli, and
36

Chiral matter on D7-branes, for example from a realization of the MSSM, can interfere with moduli
stabilization [180].

41

that the rest of the scalar potential is not positive, Vcs can be considered as an uplift
term [187–189].
This can be seen clearly in LVS, where Vcs ∼ O (1/V 2 ) whereas VK ∼ O (1/V 3 ).
Therefore, instead of concluding that positivity implies Vcs = 0, we should say that
positivity implies Vcs ∼ O (1/V 3 ), and if Vcs is positive it could play the role of an
uplifting term.
This proposal requires a large amount of tuning to get the desired size for Vcs , but
such tuning may be possible given the large number of fluxes. A concrete example
using the continuous flux approximation was presented in [188].
• Non-perturbative dilaton superpotential uplift. In type IIB string theory,
matter fields can be located either on D3-branes or D7-branes, which can host either
the Standard Model or a hidden sector. In both KKLT and LVS we have considered
hidden sectors on D7-branes, for which the gauge coupling ga is determined by the
volume Re Ta of the divisor Da wrapped by the D7-branes, and the non-perturbative
superpotential terms Wnp are proportional to e−cTa . However, hidden sectors may
also be located on D3-branes, in which case the gauge coupling is determined by the
axiodilaton τ . The non-perturbative superpotential is then of the form:
Wnp = B(zi , τ )e−b(τ −ρ)

(137)

where ρ is the blow-up of the singularity where D3-branes are located. After fixing
ρ at the singularity ⟨ρ⟩ = 0 from its D-term field equations and also using ⟨τ ⟩ from
the flux superpotential,37 the term (137) makes a contribution to the total F-term
scalar potential of the form [183]:
Vup = C

e−2b⟨τ ⟩
≥0
V

(138)

with C a positive constant. Adding the contribution of these superpotentials to
the LVS potential provides a potential uplift term [183]. This proposal is modeldependent and still lacks an explicit string example. It would be interesting to search
for such a model since it works in a way very similar to the anti-D3-brane uplift, in
the sense that the uplifting term can be easily tuned to match the O (V −3 ) of the
LVS potential, with the non-perturbative term e−2b⟨τ ⟩ playing the role of the warp
factor.
• Flux superpotential uplift. Finally, structure in the flux superpotential itself can
lead to spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry in the complex structure moduli and
axiodilaton sector. Paired with a non-perturbative superpotential depending on —
and serving to stabilize — the Kähler moduli, as in the KKLT scenario, the result
can be a metastable de Sitter minimum.
37

Recall that the dilaton is fixed at leading order by the fluxes, as it appears in the tree-level flux
superpotential. Thus, we can replace τ by its vev at this order.

42

Specifically, suppose that in compactification of type IIB string theory on an O3/O7
orientifold of a Calabi-Yau threefold X6 , three-form fluxes are chosen to produce a
PFV, as in (77), and are particularly chosen so that the effective superpotential (83)
for the axiodilaton coordinate along the PFV is a sum of N dilogarithms,
X

N

1
2πiτ p·βI
M·βI GV(βI ) Li2 e
+ ... ,
Weff (τ ) = − 3/2 5/2
2 π
I=1

(139)

and the omitted terms are subleading. Here M is a fixed set of fluxes, βI are effective
e6 , and p is a vector in the Kähler cone of X
e6 .
curve classes of the mirror threefold X
For most choices of X6 , M, and p, the N terms in (139) will not effectively compete
to produce a minimum at finite τ . However, for N > 3 the structure in (139) can be
sufficient to produce a metastable de Sitter minimum [190]. This mechanism has not
yet been realized in an explicit compactification.
The preceding sections illustrate some of the significant efforts that have been dedicated
to achieving moduli stabilization in anti-de Sitter and de Sitter vacua of type IIB string
theory (other string theories will be discussed in §5). All of the components of the KKLT
and LVS scenarios have undergone continuing testing in extremely detailed realizations.
Critical scrutiny has been been directed at anti-D3-brane supersymmetry breaking (§4.3.1),
the ten-dimensional description of non-perturbative effects (§4.1.5), and corrections that
may ruin the validity of various approximations, among many other issues. There have
even been speculations that string theory may have no de Sitter solutions [191, 192]. For a
sample of recent work emphasizing and addressing these challenges see [105, 106, 117, 118,
120, 122–125, 144, 148, 150, 151, 155, 163, 193–213]. The intensity and focus of the recent
literature illustrates that the field is very much alive and active.

4.4

Moduli stabilization and the Standard Model

As the examples above illustrate, there are many approaches to the problems of stabilizing
moduli and obtaining metastable de Sitter vacua in type IIB string theory. However, finding
a de Sitter vacuum is not the final goal: to describe quantum gravity in our Universe we
need a de Sitter solution that also incorporates the Standard Model.
The tasks of moduli stabilization and of embedding realistic particle physics in string
theory are intertwined. The gauge and Yukawa couplings of the Standard Model particles,
and the masses of their superparters, are free parameters in the EFT, and it is the dynamics
of moduli stabilization that fixes their values. Thus, moduli stabilization is a prerequisite
for extracting meaningful four-dimensional particle physics from string compactifications.
At the same time, the presence of chiral matter can impact moduli stabilization [180].
A full treatment of particle physics in string theory is beyond the scope of this work
(see for instance [214] for a recent review, and [215] for lectures on possible signatures).
However, we can mention several concrete examples of quasi-realistic Calabi-Yau orientifold models with stabilized moduli [216–220]. These models are examples of the modular
43

or bottom-up approach to string model building [221–224], which separates local questions, such as the realization of the Standard Model on a set of D-branes, from global
issues such as moduli stabilization and supersymmetry breaking. Each question can be addressed separately, and at the end the two can be put together into consistent Calabi-Yau
compactifications.
Even though considerable success has been achieved in this direction, it is fair to say
that much more work will be required to establish well-controlled de Sitter vacua in string
theory or F-theory models with realistic particle physics.
4.4.1

Soft supersymmetry breaking terms

Supersymmetry breaking in the moduli sector naturally connects to the physics of the
Standard Model. In type IIB string theory the Standard Model may arise on D3-branes
at a singularity, or on D7-branes wrapping four-cycles (which can also be generalized to
F-theory constructions). Mediation of supersymmetry breaking to the Standard Model
sector is model-dependent. However, because the moduli fields originate from the gravitational sector and so have gravitational-strength couplings, moduli-mediated supersymmetry breaking is a variant of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking.
The general structure of soft terms from moduli stabilization has been known for many
years (see for instance [225,226]). Writing the gaugino masses as M1/2 , the scalar masses as
m0 , and the trilinear terms as Aαβγ with indices α, β, γ running over the Standard Model
matter fields, one finds
1
F I ∂I f ,
f + f¯
¯
= V0 + m23/2 − F I F̄ J ∂I ∂J¯ log K̂α ,


I
I
I
= F KI + F ∂I log Yαβγ − F ∂I K̂α K̂β K̂γ .

M1/2 =
m2α
Aαβγ

(140)

Here Yαβγ are the Yukawa couplings of the matter fields; f is the moduli-dependent gauge
kinetic function; F I are the moduli F-terms, with the indices I, J running over the moduli;
and K̂i is the moduli-dependent Kähler potential for the matter fields φα . The full Kähler
potential K is the sum of the moduli Kähler potential K and the leading-order matter
Kähler potential K̂α |φα |2 :
K = K(τ, Ta , zi ) + K̂α |φα |2 + . . . .

(141)

The above quantities have been computed in various D-brane configurations representing the Standard Model [170, 178, 227–230]. In the table below we summarize the order of
magnitude of the soft terms for the KKLT and LVS models, taking the Standard Model
on D3-branes or D7-branes, assuming anti-D3-brane uplift, and using the nilpotent superfield formalism to capture the breaking of supersymmetry [170] (for a recent discussion
using dilaton superpotential uplifting see [231]). Notice that the generic expectation that
soft terms should be of order m3/2 does not hold for string models in which there are
suppressions either by 1/log(|W0 |−1 ) or by powers of 1/V.
44

In particular, scenarios such as split supersymmetry, in which the fermionic superpartners (gauginos) are hierarchically lighter than the scalar superpartners (squarks and
sleptons), can be obtained from string models. The Standard Model on D3-branes manifests a variant of sequestered supersymmetry breaking, in the sense that the source of
supersymmetry breaking couples very weakly to the Standard Model fields and there are
usually first-order cancellations for the leading contributions to the soft terms. This is similar to the no-scale structure of the moduli potential in that the non-trivial structure comes
from higher-order corrections. However, the corrections to the matter Kähler potential are
poorly understood.
Soft term

M1/2
m2α
Aαβγ

KKLT

LVS

D3

D7

D3

D7

m3/2
|log |W0 ||
m23/2

m3/2
|log |W0 ||

m3/2
gs3 V
m23/2

m3/2
cτa
m23/2

gs3 V

(cτa )2

M1/2

M1/2

m23/2

gs3 V

M1/2

M1/2

Table 2: Structure of soft supersymmetry breaking terms (in orders of magnitude) for both
KKLT and LVS. The D3 and D7 column labels indicate that the Standard Model is hosted
either on D3-branes at a singularity or on D7-branes wrapping a four-cycle with size τa .
In general the soft terms depend on the location of the Standard Model (D3-brane or
D7-branes), on the de Sitter uplifting mechanism, and on corrections to the matter Kähler
potential. For instance, in LVS with the Standard Model on D3-branes at singularities, the
masses in Planck units are are follows: the gravitino mass is m3/2 ∼ O(1/V); the gaugino
masses are further suppressed, M1/2 ∼ O(1/V 2 ); and scalar masses can be m0 ∼ O(1/V 3/2 )
or m0 ∼ O(1/V 2 ). In the first case it is clear that m3/2 ≫ m0 ≫ M1/2 , which is a
typical case of split supersymmetry. The second case would then correspond to high scale
supersymmetry breaking.
The hierarchies can be reduced by several sources of de-sequestering [232–234]. Desequestering can occur if flavor D7-branes intersect the D3-brane singularity, or if the
singularity is orientifolded (and not just orbifolded).38 Furthermore, superpotential desequestering can be caused by couplings of the form [232]
∆W = Ovis e−2πT ,

(142)

where Ovis is a gauge-invariant chiral operator constructed from visible sector chiral superfields, and T is a Kähler modulus. The coupling (142) can be viewed as a result of closed
string exchange: thus, de-sequestering can occur even if the visible sector D-branes and
38

In this case it has been argued that moduli redefinitions are needed at one loop that would cause
de-sequestering of soft terms [73].

45

the four-cycle supporting Euclidean D3-branes do not intersect. See [231] for an up-to-date
discussion of sequestering in LVS.

5

Beyond IIB

There is no fundamental reason to restrict to compactifications of type IIB string theory
as an arena for studying moduli stabilization, and as we will soon see, there are very
interesting results in other string theories and in M-theory. However, some practical and
technical considerations are responsible for the fact that type IIB string is over-represented
in the last twenty years of work on moduli stabilization. Let us briefly note these causes.
The first reason is the fact that the leading backreaction of the fluxes on the metric
is only a scaling of the original Calabi-Yau metric: one can find conformally Calabi-Yau
solutions (22) in type IIB flux compactifications [17]. This allows one to extend the use of
Calabi-Yau geometry from N = 2 to N = 1 solutions.
A second reason is that arguably the most robust mechanism for breaking supersymmetry at a parametrically low scale [97] involves an exponentially warped throat region
that caps off smoothly in the infrared: this is in contrast to solutions with singularities, in
which the supersymmetry breaking is incalculable. At the time of writing, the KlebanovStrassler solution [96] of type IIB supergravity (and close relatives involving orbifolding
or deforming it) is the only known solution with these properties. Changing this state of
affairs would be an important advance.
A third reason is that in some of the other corners of the duality web, constructing solutions with N = 1 supersymmetry involves significantly greater mathematical challenges.
For example, M-theory compactifications on G2 manifolds require working in real differential geometry, while for F-theory compactifications on Calabi-Yau fourfolds the Kähler
potential is poorly understood.
These observations should be understood as explanations for the state of the literature,
or indeed as calls to arms, not as no-go results. With this understanding, let us proceed
to briefly survey developments in other string theories.

5.1

Type IIA flux compactifications

In type IIB string theory, non-perturbative effects have proved necessary to stabilize all the
moduli,39 but in type IIA string theory, all moduli can be stabilized with fluxes alone. The
best-understood construction is due to DeWolfe, Giryavets, Kachru, and Taylor (DGKT)
[235]. Let us briefly review the main points of this scenario.
The starting point is the bosonic ten-dimensional action for massive type IIA supergravity with massless Neveu-Schwarz-Neveu-Schwarz bosonic fields including the metric
gM N , the dilaton ϕ and the antisymmetric tensor BM N , with field strength H3 = dB2 ,
As explained in §4.2, cf. (97), purely perturbative stabilization is a logical possibility in type IIB flux
compactifications, but has not yet been achieved in a controlled example.
39

46

and Ramond-Ramond fields C1 , C3 with field strengths F2 , F4 , as well as the Romans mass
term F0 .
Compactifying massive type IIA supergravity on the orientifold T 6 /Z23 with orientifold
action O = Ωws (−1)FL σ, with Ωws worldsheet parity, (−1)FL left-moving fermion number,
and σ an involution acting on the three complex coordinates xi as σ : xi → −x̄i , one
finds a four-dimensional model with N = 1 supersymmetry and an O6-plane filling the
four-dimensional spacetime and wrapping a three-cycle of T 6 . The geometric moduli of
this toroidal orientifold are the three untwisted moduli and nine blow-up modes.
One can include fluxes F0 , F2 , F4 satisfying the quantization condition:
Z
Fq = (2π)q−1 α′(q−1)/2 fq ,
fq ∈ Z q = 0, 2, 4 ,
(143)
with a similar expression for H3 in terms of integers h3 . To simplify matters we set f2 = 0,
since f2 is not essential for moduli stabilization, and we define the parameters:
m0 =

f
√0
,
2π 2α′

p = (2π)2 α′ h3 ,

κ1/3  √ ′ 3 i
ei = √
2π α f4 ,
2

(144)

with the index i = 1, 2, 3 labelling the different four-cycles
of T 6 . Here κ stands for the
R
normalization of the triple intersection number κ = ω1 ∧ ω2 ∧ ω3 , with ω1 , ω2 , ω3 a basis
of the T 6 two-forms.
The presence of the O6-plane gives rise to a tadpole that can be cancelled by H3 and
F0 fluxes satisfying
√
(145)
m0 p = −2π 2α′ ,

with no conditions on the F4 fluxes f4i .
The four-dimensional fields include the dilaton ϕ and the untwisted moduli Ti , which
we write as
Ti = bi + iti ,
τ = ξ − ie−D ,
(146)
with the volume and four-dimensional dilaton given by
V = κijk ti tj tk =: κt1 t2 t3 ,

eϕ
eD = √ ,
V

(147)

√
and with axionic fields C3 = 2ξ Re Ω and B2 = bi ωi .
Incorporating the fluxes in the ten-dimensional action, one finds a nontrivial scalar
potential. The axions are minimized at
Z
bi = 0 ,
ξ = e0 /p ,
with e0 = F6 .
(148)
The scalar potential for the dilaton and the untwisted moduli is then
!
3
p2 e2ϕ 1 X 2 2 e4ϕ m20 e4ϕ √
e3ϕ
V =
+
e
t
+
−
2
|m
p|
.
0
4V 2
2 i=1 i i 2V
2V
V 3/2
47

(149)

The four terms come from |H3 |2 , |F4 |2 , |F0 |2 , and the orientifold, respectively. The potential
is simple enough to allow an analytic solution for the minimum:
s
s
1
5 e1 e2 e3
27 κm0
ti =
,
eD = |p|
.
(150)
|ei | 3 κm0
160 e1 e2 e3
The minimum can also be found using the N = 1 effective field theory, with the Kähler
potential


K = − log V − 4 log i(τ − τ̄ ) .
(151)
The flux superpotential is:

Z

Z
Z
1
F0
W = −pτ + e0 + Jc ∧ F4 −
Jc ∧ Jc ∧ F2 −
Jc ∧ Jc ∧ Jc ,
2
6
m0
1
κijk T i T j T k ,
(152)
= −pτ + e0 + ei T i + κijk mi T j T k −
2
6
P 1,1
where Jc is the complexified Kähler form Jc = B2 + iJ = hi=1 Ti ωi . The parameters mi
are proportional to the F2 fluxes, which we have set to zero. The blow-up modes can be
incorporated by writing the volume as
V = κt1 t2 t3 + β

12
X

t3A .

(153)

A=4

Using (151) and (152) in (21), one recovers (150). The minimum for the blow-up modes
can be computed giving:
s
−10fA
(154)
tA = −
3βm0
where fA is the F4 flux on the corresponding blown-up four-cycle. Provided that fA ≪ ei ,
the blow-up modes are small enough to justify the toroidal orientifold approximation,
in the sense that expansion around the singularity is justified, with the blow-up modes
hierarchically smaller than the string scale. The negative signs of the tA solutions are
determined by the Kähler cone conditions. Comparing (153) and (114), we see that the
geometry has a Swiss cheese form.
Let us summarize key features of the DGKT model:
• The value of the potential at the minimum is negative,
r
m0 e1 e2 e3 4D
V = −2
e
15κ
so the solution is an AdS vacuum.

(155)

• Contrary to the IIB case, the fluxes ei are not bounded by tadpole conditions, and
so the number of solutions is infinite.
48

• The solutions can be supersymmetric or non-supersymmetric [235, 236].
• Scaling the fluxes ei → λei yields V → λ3/2 V, eϕ → λ−3/4 eϕ and V → λ−9/2 V , which
shows that there is a hierarchy of scales: the larger the fluxes, the larger the volume
and the smaller the string coupling.
In the DGKT solution the effects of the orientifold planes are accounted for in the smeared
approximation. The corresponding localized solutions were studied in [237, 238], to first
order in an expansion around the large flux limit.
The potential CFT dual of the DGKT model has an interesting property: the operators
dual to some of the stabilized moduli have integer conformal dimensions [239–242] (see also
the recent extension [243], as well as [244] for similar considerations in the type IIB mirror).
Moving beyond the AdS4 vacua of DGKT, a proposal for classical de Sitter vacua
of massive40 type IIA supergravity, in compactifications on a circle times a negatively
curved space, was presented in [246] (see also [247]). These configurations contain localized
and backreacted O8-planes, and corrections from string theory are large near the singular
sources.41

5.2

Heterotic strings

The first attempts at moduli stabilization were within the context of the heterotic string.
Starting with the E8 × E8 string with the Standard Model group inside one of the E8
factors, the second E8 provides a hidden sector that could lead to a gaugino condensate
superpotential. In the heterotic string the tree-level gauge kinetic function is f = S,
where S is the heterotic dilaton field, related to the string coupling by gs−2 = ⟨ReS⟩.
If the condensing gauge group in the hidden sector is G ⊆ E8 , the gaugino condensate
superpotential is
8π 2

Wλλ = A e− c(G) S .
In the presence of H3 flux, one then has [249, 250]:
Z
8π 2
W = H ∧ Ω + A e− c(G) S .

(156)

(157)

This can be combined with the standard Kähler potential42 for S and the overall Kähler
modulus field T ,


K = −3 log T + T − log S + S ,
(158)
40

Massless type IIA supergravity has proved to be a comparatively difficult setting for constructing
stabilized vacua. However, see [245], which presented scale-separated vacua of massless type IIA, with
controllably small backreaction of the orientifold planes.
41
It was argued in [248] that the solutions of [246] are incompatible with the integrated supergravity
equations of motion.
42
Fluxes and non-perturbative effects were combined with α′ corrections to the Kähler potential to find
a version of LVS in the heterotic string in [251].

49

to determine the scalar potential for S and T . However, quantization of H3 fluxes appears
to only allow a minimum at strong coupling, beyond the domain of validity of the EFT [250].
Furthermore, the modulus T remains unfixed.
Three proposals were made to address these problems. First, assuming that the hidden
gauge group is a product of at least two gauge groups that allow gaugino condensation,
the superpotential for S could be of the racetrack form [252–254]
X
W (S) =
Ai e−ci S ,
(159)
i

where the exponentials compete with each other to give rise to a weak coupling minimum
with ⟨S⟩ ≫ 1.
The second idea was to invoke T -duality of the EFT, which for a single complex field T
is the SL(2, Z) action on T [255–257], with S being invariant. Imposing that the Kählerinvariant combination K + log |W |2 is invariant then implies that the non-perturbative
superpotential should transform as a modular form of weight 3 [256, 257]:
W (S, T ) =

F (j(T ), S)
,
η(T )6

W → (icT +d)−3 W ,

T →

aT − ib
,
icT + d

ad−bc = 1 , (160)

where η(T ) is the Dedekind η function and j(T ) is the absolute modular invariant function. Concrete calculations of the one-loop threshold corrections to the holomorphic gauge
kinetic function give f = S + α log η(T ) [258]. This leads to moduli stabilization of the
T field at ⟨T ⟩ = 1.2 [256] in string units (see also [257]), with a negative cosmological
constant, also of string scale, and with broken
 supersymmetry.
n
8m+12n
Generalizations to functions F j(T ), S = Ω(S)Gm
, where G4 , G6 are
4 G6 P (j)/η
the holomorphic Eisenstein functions of weight 4 and 6 respectively, and P (j(T ) is a polynomial of j(T ), were studied in [259], and found to generate potentials with perturbatively
stable AdS vacua. Most of these configurations have minima at the fixed points T = 1 and
T = eiπ/6 , which are always extrema and automatically preserve supersymmetry, but there
exist other configurations in which supersymmetry is broken [259]. Recent generalizations
to include concrete toroidal orbifold models [260] and potential de Sitter minima have been
studied in [261, 262].
In Calabi-Yau compactifications of the heterotic string, H3 flux can at most fix the
complex structure moduli. This limitation has motivated studying the heterotic string
compactified on more general spaces, including SU (3) structure and half-flat manifolds
[263–265]. Furthermore, in addition to the geometric moduli, heterotic compactifications
have vector bundle moduli (see e.g. [266]) which are singlets of the corresponding gauge
group for (0, 2) or non-standard-embedding compactifications. Stabilizing them is also a
challenge, similar to that of open string moduli in type II strings. A difference with type II
models is the fact that in heterotic models the gauge sector is in the bulk, and so there is
no route to a modular approach that separates the task of moduli stabilization from that
of constructing the Standard Model. In the heterotic string the two challenges need to be
addressed simultaneously.
50

A third approach [267] began by revisiting the apparent obstacle to using (157) to
stabilize at weak coupling, which Ris that for an integrally-quantized three-form dB ∈
H 3 (X, Z), the superpotential term dB ∧ Ω cannot be small. However, in the heterotic
string the three-form flux is given by
H = dB +

α′
α′
Ω3 (A) − Ω3 (ω) ,
4
4

(161)

where for a gauge connection A we define the Chern-Simons three-form Ω3 (A) by
2
Ω3 (A) := A ∧ dA + A ∧ A ∧ A .
3

(162)

Similarly, Ω3 (ω) is the Chern-Simons three-form built from the spin connection ω. Integrating over a three-cycle Q ∈ H3 (X, Z), we define the Chern-Simons invariant
Z
CS(A, Q) :=
Ω3 (A) .
(163)
Q

In general, CS(A, Q) is a rational number, not necessarily an integer. The proposal of [267]
was to consider X6 with Q ⊂ X6 supporting fractional Chern-Simons invariants, take
dB = 0, and embed the spin connection in the gauge connection, in such a way that the
total flux superpotential is small. Writing Ω̌ for the three-cycle Poincaré dual to Ω, we
have, for dB = Ω3 (ω) = 0,
Z
Z
α′
α′
H ∧Ω=−
Ω3 (A) = − CS(A, Ω̌) ,
(164)
4 Ω̌
4
and the object on the right is not restricted by integer quantization.
Examples were given in [267] in which A is a connection on a flatR bundle with nontrivial
holonomies, i.e. where A is characterized by its Wilson lines, and H ∧ Ω is smaller than
integral quantization would have required. Stabilization of all moduli was studied in [251],
while CS(A, Q) was very carefully computed in a number of explicit examples, some with
flat connections (Wilson lines) and others with curvature, in [268,269]. These constructions
illustrate the inevitable connection between the visible sector and moduli stabilization in
the heterotic string: some of the choices of visible sector Wilson lines proposed in the
literature to break the visible E8 to the Standard Model actually introduce nonvanishing
fractional Chern-Simons invariants, and so break supersymmetry via (164) [267].

5.3

Type I

Even though type I theories can be thought of as orientifolded versions of type II, there are
mechanisms that are most readily developed in the type I context. Fluxes of three-forms
combined with magnetic fluxes give a rich range of possibilities for moduli stabilization.
Concrete models in terms of magnetized D9-branes with toroidal orbifold compactifications
have been studied in [270, 271]; see also [272].
51

5.4

M-theory

Four-dimensional N = 1 vacua result from compactifications of eleven-dimensional supergravity, which is the low-energy limit of M-theory, on seven-manifolds of G2 holonomy [273].
Suppose that X7 is a compact manifold of G2 holonomy, with N = b3 (X7 ), and let {Σi },
i = 1, . . . , N be a basis of independent three-cycles. Defining ℓ9M = 4πκ211 and introducing
the G2 -invariant three-form Φ, we can write the geometric moduli as [274]
Z
Z
zi ≡ ti + isi :=
C3 + i
Φ.
(165)
Σi

Σi

Then the volume V7 = Vol(X7 )/ℓ7M is a homogeneous function of the si , of degree 7/3 [275],
and the Kähler potential is



K = −3 ln 4π 1/3 V7 (s1 , . . . sN ) .

(166)

The G4 flux of M-theory gives rise to a classical superpotential [275, 276] — for statistics
of the resulting flux vacua, see [274]. Additional nonperturbative contributions to the
superpotential arise from gaugino condensation in gauge sectors supported on singularities
in X7 , as well as from Euclidean M2-branes wrapping three-cycles calibrated by Φ (see
e.g. [277]).
The phenomenology of G2 compactifications was explored in [278, 279], in a class of
scenarios in which the gaugino condensate superpotential alone, with vanishing fluxes, was
argued to stabilize all moduli.
Overall, despite much study of the geometry and physics of manifolds of G2 holonomy
(see e.g. [280–285] and references therein), the details of moduli stabilization are not yet
as fully developed, especially in the more realistic setups with singularities, as in the string
theory case.

5.5

General mechanisms

We have now seen many proposals for moduli stabilization from different corners of the
string/M-theory moduli space, some of them with the potential to give rise to de Sitter
solutions. Even though the implementations differ, the core structures are similar, and the
strategy is always to incorporate a sufficiently rich collection of sources that are present in
string theory.
We have extensively discussed the role of fluxes, D-branes, anti-D-branes, orientifolds,
and quantum effects. Let us now consider a more complete list of possible sources: following
the discussion in [286], we classify the various sources of non-derivative terms in the fourdimensional action from the higher-dimensional theory, without assuming that the starting
point is supersymmetric or that the compactification is Ricci-flat.
• Non-critical strings. Strings in dimensions above the critical dimension provide a
positive contribution to the vacuum energy [286],
Vnc ∝

(D − Dcrit ) e2ϕ
,
V
52

(167)

and can give rise to anti-de Sitter and de Sitter vacua in four dimensions [287, 288];
see [213] for a recent critical assessment of this mechanism.
• Curvature of compact space. In the preceding sections we largely restricted to
compactifications admitting Ricci-flat metrics, for which the contribution of the internal space to the Einstein-Hilbert action vanishes. In a more general compactification
on a compact six-manifold X6 with curvature R6 , one has [286]
Z
e2ϕ
Vcurv ∝ − 2
R6 .
(168)
V X6
Thus, the curvature contribution to the four-dimensional potential is negative if X6 is
a positively-curved space, such as a sphere, and is positive if X6 is a negatively-curved
space, such a product of Riemann surfaces of genus g > 1. Hyperbolic compactifications have been explored as a means of obtaining de Sitter solutions from eleven
dimensions in [289] (for previous work in this direction see [290]). An important
lesson from the two-dimensional case is that negatively-curved manifolds are much
more numerous than positively-curved manifolds.
• Fluxes. As we have seen, fluxes of antisymmetric tensor fields make positive contributions to the scalar potential. The positivity of the flux contribution is a direct consequence of the positivity of the corresponding kinetic terms in the higher-dimensional
theory.
• Branes. In principle branes contribute positively to the scalar potential, but due
to their BPS nature this contribution often cancels against other sources in a full
solution. Antibranes, as well as any non-BPS branes, contribute positively to the
scalar potential.
• Orientifolds. Orientifolds contribute a similar amount as D-branes, but with a
negative sign if they have negative tension.
• Perturbative corrections. We have seen that such corrections contribute with
different powers of eϕ and 1/V, and the sign can be positive or negative.
• Non-perturbative effects. Non-perturbative effects contribute terms of order e−cρ
where ρ is the modulus (Kähler or dilaton) measuring the gauge coupling. Again
either sign is possible.
It is important to emphasize that the effects enumerated above exist, and it is not
justified to ignore them. Combining some or all of these effects can naturally give rise to
vacua for the moduli fields at the level of the EFT analysis.
However, the devil is in the details: finding minima in the regime of validity of the EFT
is highly nontrivial. There is an enormous space of possible models, very little of which
has been populated to date with full-fledged and explicit constructions. The cause of this
state of affairs is not that no such constructions can exist, but just that quantum gravity
53

is relatively difficult, and writing down a mathematical model of a realistic universe takes
a certain amount of work. Moreover, although the concrete realizations produced to date
may look baroque, the general principles are clear and clean.

6

Cosmology

Arguably the most important application of moduli stabilization is to the study of cosmology in string theory. The dark universe involves three main unknowns: dark matter and
dark energy today, and the inflationary energy at very early times. Moduli are natural
candidates for all three unknowns. Moreover, the dynamics of moduli fields encodes the
evolution of the extra dimensions of string theory, and can impact early stages of cosmic
history.
Inflation, a transient period of accelerated expansion, is the leading scenario to describe early-universe cosmology. Inflationary theory has impressive achievements, including solving the horizon and flatness problems of the Friedmann-Lemaı̂tre-Robertson-Walker
(FLRW) cosmology and, more importantly, explaining the observed pattern of density perturbations imprinted in the cosmic microwave background (CMB). However, inflation itself
does not have an explanation: it is a framework in search of a theory. String theory may
be that theory.
Having a period of accelerated expansion tends to dilute whatever physics existed at
high energies, so one could imagine that string-theoretical signatures might be hidden
from potential observations. Fortunately, the moduli tend to be light enough to survive
after inflation, and may play a relevant role after inflation: not only in the early universe,
between inflation and nucleosynthesis, but also at late times in the form of dark energy.
This motivates the study of cosmology within moduli stabilization.43

6.1

Inflation

Inflation was historically understood as a mechanism, and a phenomenon, in quantum
field theory coupled to general relativity. If one temporarily and counterfactually disregards all effects of the quantization of gravity, inflation is a striking success: its predictive
and explanatory power far exceeds the new questions that it raises. In particular, inflation predicted that the universe should be spatially flat to good approximation, and it
predicted that the CMB should have fluctuations that are nearly, but not exactly, scaleinvariant; nearly Gaussian; and correlated on superhorizon scales. All these predictions
were decisively confirmed at the start of the era of precision cosmology.
43

String theory may have cosmological signatures beyond inflation (see for instance the recent review [7]
and references therein). However, the implementation of alternatives to inflation is challenging: EFT
descriptions are often insufficient, and the correspondence with observations is less developed than in the
case of inflation. In this sense inflation appears to be preferred both by experimental evidence and by
theoretical considerations. Even so, it is prudent to explore and develop alternatives.

54

Inflation led to new questions: what is the inflaton field? What dynamics led to the
initial conditions for inflation? String theory has the potential to address these questions:
in particular, it is replete with candidates for the inflaton field, in the form of the many
axions and moduli found in typical compactifications. At the same time, string theory
sharpens one of the central problems of inflationary cosmology: why is the inflaton potential
flat enough to support prolonged accelerated expansion?
To see this, consider a single real scalar field ϕ, a candidate inflaton, coupled to general
relativity, whose Lagrangian density at tree level is
Mpl2
1
R − (∂ϕ)2 − V0 (ϕ) ,
L=
2
2

(169)

where V0 (ϕ) is the tree-level (i.e., classical) scalar potential. Including terms with at most
two derivatives, the quantum-corrected Lagrangian density — incorporating the effects of
loops of the light fields, which are the inflaton and the graviton — takes the form
Mpl2
1
L=
R − f (ϕ) (∂ϕ)2 − V (ϕ) ,
2
2

(170)

where f (ϕ) and V (ϕ) are two functions of ϕ, and we have used the freedom to rescale
to Einstein frame to absorb a possible additional function of ϕ from the Einstein-Hilbert
term. The effect of f (ϕ) is generally small (see [6] for a detailed discussion), and so we will
set f (ϕ) → 1 henceforth.
A sufficient condition for the theory (170) to support a prolonged period of inflation is
that the slope and curvature of the potential are small compared to the Plack mass: given
suitable initial conditions, the potential energy can then dominate over the kinetic energy,
with p ≈ −ρ, and can do so for many e-folds of expansion. Specifically, slow-roll inflation
is possible if
 
Mpl2 V ′ 2
V ′′
≪1
and
η := Mpl2
≪ 1,
(171)
ε :=
2
V
V

d
with primes denoting derivatives dϕ
.
In general there is no systematic relation between V0 (ϕ) and V (ϕ), so having the classical
potential V0 (ϕ) fulfill the slow-roll conditions (171) does not imply that the full potential
V (ϕ) will do so. In other words, quantum corrections to the potential can affect whether
inflation is possible.
In the important case that V0 (ϕ) preserves an approximate shift symmetry, so will V (ϕ).
In particular, if
1
V0 (ϕ) = m20 ϕ2 ,
(172)
2
with m0 ≪ Mpl , then one finds

V (ϕ) = V0 (ϕ) + O V0 /Mpl4 ≈ V0 (ϕ) .
(173)

Thus, a small inflaton mass is radiatively stable: its smallness is not spoiled by loops of
the light fields.
55

An argument that was historically
 influential, but leads to erroneous conclusions, states
that the correction term O V0 /Mpl4 in (173) captures the leading quantum gravity corrections to the effective theory (169), and so inflation with the potential 21 m20 ϕ2 is not
impacted by the quantization of gravity. The logical flaw is the following: if (169) were
the classical theory for ϕ and the massless graviton, obtained after integrating out all the
massive degrees of freedom of quantum gravity, then indeed the remaining corrections from
loops of the light fields would be negligible. But deep principles of quantum gravity appear
to forbid exact shift symmetries,44 such as would occur with m0 → 0, and so the question
of how small m0 can be is already a quantum gravity question: it can only be resolved
with knowledge of the ultraviolet completion of gravity.
The terminology is one cause of the confusion. The Wilsonian EFT obtained by integrating out heavy fields, and high-momentum modes of light fields, is reasonably termed
the classical theory of the light fields, in which one can still compute quantum corrections
from loops of the light fields. However, the nature and couplings of the heavy fields, which
in turn impact the form of the classical EFT, are dictated by the ultraviolet completion,
i.e. by the quantum theory of gravity.
To further illustrate this point, consider two candidate theories of quantum gravity,
T1 and T2 , each with some spectrum of massive states with M > Mpl . Suppose that at
low energies
T

 1 contains a light field ϕ with an accidentally flat potential VT1 , such that
ε VT1 , η VT1 ≪ 1: then slow-roll inflation is possible in the theory T1 . If the spectra
of heavy states in T1 and T2 differ only by factors of order unity, one would be tempted
to call T1 and T2 ‘similar’ ultraviolet completions of gravity, and to claim that their lowenergy phenomenology should be similar as well. However, the slow-roll parameter
η is

highly sensitive to the Planck-scale spectrum, and one generally finds η VT2 ≈ 1, so that
inflation does not occur in the theory T2 . Thus, whether inflation occurs or not can be
changed by very subtle changes to the spectrum of states at masses M > Mpl .
In summary, quantum gravity effects do not decouple from inflation, and the η parameter is sensitive to the ultraviolet completion. This fact is termed the eta problem. In some
older papers this issue is called the supergravity eta problem, but it is in no way special to
supergravity. Indeed, the eta problem is nothing more than the statement that an inflaton
mass that is small compared to the cutoff scale is unnatural in effective field theory.
Another statement of the problem is as follows: if the low-energy potential is
!
X  ϕ δ
(174)
cδ
V (ϕ) = V0 (ϕ) 1 +
Mpl
δ
with Wilson coefficients cδ , then in the absence of any additional structure, one needs to
know the cδ with δ ≲ 2 to at least O(1%) accuracy in order to exhibit slow-roll inflation.
That is, slow-roll inflation is affected by Planck-suppressed operators up to dimension
∆ = δ + 4 ≈ 6.
44

Some of the sharpest arguments against exact global symmetries in quantum gravity were developed
in the context of the Weak Gravity Conjecture [291]; see the reviews [292–295].

56

This state of affairs is an extraordinary opportunity for string theory. Knowledge of
the structure of quantum gravity is essential in order to interpret the results of precision
CMB observations made over the past two decades.

6.2

Inflation in string theory

The arguments just presented are general facts about a low-energy effective field theory of
quantum gravity, and did not rely on details of string theory. However, having a concrete
ultraviolet completion in hand dramatically sharpens the picture.45
Early works on inflation in string theory, with closed string moduli serving as the
inflaton, include [296,297]. The discovery of D-branes led to the idea of brane inflation [298],
developed in detail in [299] (see also [300,301]), in which the inflaton is the separation of a
brane-antibrane pair. The end of inflation is triggered by condensation of the open string
tachyon, potentially leaving cosmic superstrings as relics [302]. However, these studies
appeared before the emergence of concrete scenarios for the stabilization of all moduli, and
so the treatment of moduli couplings was necessarily incomplete.
The first analysis of inflation in a compactification with stabilized moduli appeared
in [143], which considered a D3-brane moving towards an anti-D3-brane in a KlebanovStrassler throat region, in the context of a KKLT vacuum. The first key finding of [143]
was that warping caused the Coulomb interaction of the D3-brane and anti-D3-brane to
be extremely flat.46 However, a more significant finding, with implications for a much
wider range of models, was that moduli stabilization reintroduced the eta problem [143].
Specifically, stabilization of the Kähler moduli by nonperturbative effects introduced new
inflaton mass terms, in such a way that the total inflaton potential could be flat enough
for prolonged slow-roll inflation only if competing terms could be balanced against each
other in a modest (percent-level) fine-tuning.
The principal model-dependent corrections to the inflaton mass in the scenario of [143]
come from the inflaton-dependence of Pfaffian factors in the non-perturbative superpotential (38). The effects on the inflaton potential of non-perturbative superpotential terms
supported on D7-branes in the throat region were computed in [45] (building on [44])
and [304], while the general form of contributions from the bulk of the compactification
was determined in [305] and [116]. The resulting phenomenology was analyzed in [306,307];
for details see [6]. For a recent alternative implementation of brane inflation see [78].
Closed string moduli are also promising inflaton candidates. In the context of LVS,
Kähler moduli can drive inflation [130, 138]. In particular, for fibered Calabi-Yau compactifications with fiber modulus τf , the volume can be written as V ∝ τf F (τi ) + G(τi )
with τi ̸= τf , i = 1, . . . , h11 − 1 and F, G homogeneous functions of degree 1/2 and 3/2,
respectively. The fiber modulus τf can be an inflaton candidate: the scalar potential for
45

Comprehensive treatments of inflation in string theory appear in [6, 7]; here we will limit ourselves to
highlighting developments closely linked to moduli stabilization.
46
Warping also allowed for cosmic superstrings with tension far below existing limits [143, 303].

57

√
the canonically-normalized scalar field ϕ, defined as τf ∝ eαϕ , α = 1/ 3, is


V (ϕ) = V0 1 − ae−αϕ + . . . ,

(175)

where V0 and a are computable constants. The ellipses include terms that are subdominant
terms at large ϕ. Fibre™ inflation models lead to a potentially-detectable primordial tensor
signal, with a robust prediction for the spectral index ns = 0.969, a tensor-to-scalar ratio
r = 0.007, and a field displacement ∆ϕ ≃ 5 in Planck units. These models will be
confronted by experiment in the next decade.
The approximate flatness of the potential for ϕ is a consequence of classical scaling
symmetries, as discussed in §3.1 and §3.2, for which ϕ can be seen as a pseudo-Goldstone
boson [308, 309]. Even so, the Kähler moduli inflation models of [130, 138] are sensitive
to the form of loop corrections to the Kähler potential. For a recent estimate of such
corrections see [212].
If the inflaton is an axion, the axion shift symmetry can protect the potential against
corrections [310]. Embedding the original natural inflation idea of [310] in string theory
proved difficult because the requisite super-Planckian decay constants — of individual
axions — have not been found in controlled parameter regimes [291, 311].47 Ideas for
evading this problem include alignment of two or more axions [314] and collective displacement of many axions [315, 316]. Axion inflation models in string theory and F-theory
include [317, 318].
Axion monodromy [319] achieves large-field inflation by winding through many periods
of an axion with sub-Planckian periodicity. The axion monodromy model of [21] involves
1,1
a type IIB flux compactification on a Calabi-Yau orientifold with h−
> 0: the inflaton is
the two-form C2 (see Table 1) on a cycle wrapped by an NS5-brane/anti-NS5-brane pair,
and the inflaton potential is [21, 320]
 
ϕ
3
4
,
(176)
V (ϕ) = µ ϕ + Λ cos
f
where µ, f , and Λ are parameters with the dimensions of mass. The periodic modulation
in (176) can give rise to oscillatory signatures in the CMB [320]. The mechanism of [21]
is compatible with the KKLT scenario for moduli stabilization: the shift symmetry of C2
protects the inflaton from some (but not all) potentially dangerous terms.
The order parameter measuring the progress of axion monodromy inflation is the reduction of monodromy charge as the inflaton configuration unwinds. For example, in [21]
the monodromy charge is D3-brane charge accumulated on the NS5-brane pair, while
in [321] it is D3-brane charge induced on moving D7-branes. A very general problem in
such models is that the stress-energy of monodromy charge backreacts on the internal
space [21, 320, 322, 323]. As a result, one finds that some form of fine-tuning is required in
47

Strictly speaking, single axion periodicities somewhat greater than Mpl have been exhibited in the
Lagrangians of consistent compactifications [312, 313], but the moduli potentials in these models do not
allow the dynamics of large-field inflation: the axion energy in such a case would backreact disastrously.

58

all fully-realized48 axion monodromy scenarios, though the extent of the difficulty is modeldependent. To date, there is no fully explicit realizaion of axion monodromy inflation in
a compact model, but there is also no known obstacle other than the complexity of the
configuration: see e.g. [324–331] for progress in this direction.

6.3

After inflation

One of the most important aspects of string moduli is that they naturally change the early
history of the universe even after a period of inflation. Inflation tends to wash out physics
at energies higher than the inflation scale, but moduli can survive in some circumstances.
In supersymmetry-breaking compactifications one can estimate the typical moduli masses
to be mϕ ≃ m3/2 , since the moduli couple gravitationally and are massless in the absence of
supersymmetry breaking (in Minkowski space). In concrete cases this estimate is modified
as follows:




m3/2 1/2
Mpl
m3/2 ,
LVS : mϕ ≃
m3/2 ,
(177)
KKLT : mϕ ≃ ln
m3/2
Mpl
with ϕ the lightest modulus (e.g. the volume modulus in LVS) and m3/2 = WV0 Mpl .
Because the moduli have gravitational-strength couplings, their decay rates are suppressed by the Planck mass, with
m3ϕ
Γ≃
,
(178)
16πMpl2
and the corresponding reheating temperature from moduli decay is of order
Trh ≃



mϕ
Mpl

1/2

mϕ .

(179)

These properties of the moduli have a number of important post-inflationary implications:
• Moduli domination. Because the moduli are light but not relativistic, and because
their decay rate is suppressed by powers of the Planck mass, they tend to be very
stable, and can dominate the energy density of the universe as in matter domination,
with ρ ∼ 1/a(t)3 . This means that in theories with moduli, inflation is very often
followed by a period of moduli domination, unlike the standard Big Bang cosmology.
• Cosmological moduli problem (CMP) [332–334]. In order to avoid spoiling the
success of Big Bang nucleosynthesis (BBN), the reheating temperature from moduli
decays has to satisfy Trh ≳ 1 MeV, which implies mϕ ≳ 30 TeV. In the naive estimate
that mϕ ≃ Msoft ≃ m3/2 it would thus be difficult to have mϕ ≳ 30 TeV while
imposing Msoft ≃ 1 TeV in order to address the hierarchy problem.
48

Oversimplified four-dimensional EFT models of axion monodromy often omit the effects of backreaction
of monodromy charge, but this is akin to assuming a shift symmetry, as in (173).

59

In concrete KKLT and LVS scenarios the soft masses depend on the gravitino mass
in different ways, depending on the location of the Standard Model (on D3-branes
or D7-branes) and the degree of sequestering of the supersymmetry-breaking sector.
For instance as we have seen in the previous section (see Table 2):


Mpl
2
KKLT :
mϕ ≃ ln
Msoft ,
m3/2
1/2

Mpl
LVS :
mϕ ≃ Msoft or mϕ ≃
Msoft
(180)
m3/2
Therefore the cosmological moduli problem may be ameliorated in some scenarios.
Furthermore, the lack of evidence for supersymmetry at the TeV scale has turned
this problem into a feature, namely moduli domination.
• Overshoot problem and kination. After inflation, which is thought to occur
at relatively high energies, moduli fields will evolve towards the minimum of their
scalar potential. Since the vacuum has to describe physics at low energies, there
is in general a hierarchy between the initial and final energies. Furthermore, since
universal fields including the overall volume and dilaton have runaway minima, it is
then possible that the evolution of some modulus field ϕ is energetic enough to pass
over the barrier between the physical four-dimensional vacuum and the vacuum at
infinity [335]. This difficulty is known as the overshoot problem.
Fortunately, there are ways to address this problem [336–339]. If the kinetic energy of
the evolving modulus dominates over other sources, the resulting period is known as
kination. The FLRW equations show that the kinetic energy density during kination
dilutes as ρ ∝ 1/a(t)6 , which is much faster than other sources of energy (1/a4 for
radiation or 1/a3 for matter). Thus, these other sources will end up dominating, and
the corresponding friction term in the scalar field equation,
ϕ̈ + 3H ϕ̇ + V ′ (ϕ) = 0 ,

(181)

is enough to efficiently avoid overshooting. This can be explicitly computed by considering the set of equations as a dynamical system in which for simple enough
potentials, like V ∼ e−λϕ in the rolling region (such as in LVS), there is an attractor
solution that avoids overshooting.
• Dark radiation.
Another consequence of moduli for post-inflationary physics is that the last modulus
to decay, rather than the inflaton field itself, is responsible for (the final stage of)
reheating. This differs from the simplest inflationary cosmology. The decay products
tend to include, in addition to the Standard Model fields, other light bosons resulting
from the compactification, such as ultralight axions or dark photons, which may

60

contribute to dark radiation [340, 341].49 The bounds on dark radiation are very
tight. These are parameterized by the effective number of neutrinos Neff . It is known
experimentally that any contribution to this number from fields beyond the Standard
Model is bounded by [343]
exp
= 2.99 ± 0.17,
Neff

SM
Neff
= 3.04,

∆Neff < 0.2 ,

(182)

leaving almost no room for extra contributions. This is a strong experimental constraint on string theory models, and is also an opportunity. For instance, the axion
partner of the volume modulus in LVS may be a candidate for dark radiation, since
2/3
it is always relativistic, as its mass is of order m ≃ e−cV : see [344] for a recent
analysis of dark radiation in LVS.
• Oscillons and moduli stars. As the scalar fields evolve toward their vacuum state,
in addition to the coherent oscillations that lead to moduli domination, they may
give rise to inhomogeneities known as oscillons or oscillatons (or boson stars): these
are non-topological solitonic objects that are unstable but long-lived. Independent of
gravity, the structure of the scalar potential away from the minimum may be sensitive
to the non-linear self-interactions of the scalar field. In an expansion around the
minimum the potential can be written as:
V = V0 + m2 ϕ2 +

gϕn
+ ... ,
Λn−4

(183)

with n the first non-vanishing power and Λ a cutoff. If g < 0, then the interaction is
attractive and tends to give rise to oscillons of mass M ≃ Λ2 /m and size R ∼ 1/m.
The mechanism for their formation may be either tachyonic oscillations or parametric
resonance. Once gravity is relevant (Λ ≃ Mpl ), it contributes to the attraction and
gives rise to oscillatons or boson stars (see [345] for recent review and references).
These objects could be formed by the KKLT modulus, or by the small modulus in
LVS, but not by the volume or fiber moduli [346, 347]. Numerical simulations have
been performed illustrating the structure of these inhomogeneities and in particular
the spectrum of gravitational waves that they produce. Even though the spectrum
varies, the corresponding frequency of the gravitational waves is of order ω ≃ 1 GHz,
which is well beyond the reach of LIGO/VIRGO and LISA. This has motivated recent
efforts to search for ultra-high-frequency gravitational waves.
High-energy theories, including string theories, furnish other potential sources of
gravitational waves that could test energies as high as the GUT scale, M ≃ 10−2 Mpl .
The sensitivity required to probe these frequencies is beyond current technology,
but the fact that there are no known astrophysical sources for such high-frequency
gravitational waves makes these waves very appealing future targets: a detection
49

For a recent review with further references see [7]. Dark radiation constraints from ultralight axions
were considered in [342], and found not to become more severe as the number of axions increases.

61

would shed light on physics at energies far beyond the reach of colliders and at the
same time probe very early cosmology. For a comprehensive review of ultra-highfrequency gravitational waves see [348].

6.4

Dark energy

Observations of supernovae and of the cosmic microwave background show that the expansion of the Universe is accelerating. The current dark energy density is
ρ ≈ 10−123 Mpl4 ,

(184)

with an equation of state relating ρ and pressure p [343]:
w=

p
= −1.03 ± 0.03 .
ρ

(185)

The most straightforward explanation is that the dark energy density comes from a cosmological constant, p = −ρ, that is positive but extremely small. This is the origin of the
now-standard ΛCDM model for cosmology, where Λ stands for the cosmological constant
and CDM for cold dark matter.
The cosmological constant problem is the task of explaining why (184) is so small.
At present there is no generally-accepted dynamical solution to the cosmological constant
problem, in quantum field theory or in string theory. However, string theory has provided
a framework: anthropic selection in the landscape of flux compactifications.50
The idea that the cosmological constant might be determined by anthropic selection
was advanced by Weinberg, who argued that requiring the formation of galaxies imposes
the constraint [351]
−10−123 ≲ ρ/Mpl4 ≲ 3 × 10−121 .
(186)

However, even if one accepts anthropic51 selection as an approach, it is also necessary to
have a family of theories or vacua, among which are some that obey (186) and can be
selected.
The next key idea was the Bousso-Polchinski [353] observation that compactifications
admitting many choices of quantized flux furnish a densely-spaced ‘discretuum’ of vacua,
potentially including some with ρ near the observed value (cf. [354]). The toy model
proposed by Bousso and Polchinski takes the form (in units Mpl = 1)
Λ = Λbare + ⃗q T · ⃗q ,

(187)

where ⃗q ∈ ZN represents a vector of flux integers. If the bare cosmological constant Λbare is
negative (and, we suppose, of order unity), then finding a configuration with smallp
|Λ| from
(187) amounts to finding a lattice vector ⃗q whose length is extremely close to |Λbare |.

50
Those who prefer to avoid anthropic arguments are encouraged to propose an alternative in the form of
a dynamical explanation of the smallness of the dark energy. For recent attempts see for instance [349,350].
51
A conceptually similar approach that does not explicitly invoke observers appears in [352].

62

For N ≫ 1 this is typically possible in principle, but actually finding such a vector is
exponentially costly [86].
Bousso and Polchinski did not propose a complete microscopic realization of their scenario in [353], but a framework came soon after, in the form of the landscape of flux vacua
in type IIB compactifications, with moduli stabilized as in the KKLT scenario. The fluxes
in question are F3 and H3 , and the large dimension N of the flux lattice is N = 2h2,1 ,
which is of order hundreds in typical Calabi-Yau threefolds.
The AdS4 vacua found in [80] and reviewed in §4.1.4 are incarnations of the KKLT
scenario, and can have exponentially small cosmological constants. However, the vacua
of [80] are not realizations of the Bousso-Polchinski mechanism as written in (187): the
bare cosmological constant Λbare vanishes in the vacua of [80], and N need not be large:
examples exist with N = 4 and 5 in which |ρ| ≪ 10−123 Mpl4 . Moreover, the moduli mass
scale in [80] is itself extremely small, whereas if one finds small Λ via (187) it remains
possible that all mass scales other than Λ itself are large. Thus, the constructions of [80]
constitute progress in achieving scale separation in stabilized vacua, but not in solving the
cosmological constant problem.
Although the outlines are in place, a proper implementation of the anthropic approach
to the cosmological constant problem will require a better understanding of how to populate
the landscape through vacuum decays, and how to define a measure on the string landscape
(see e.g. [355]). Vacuum decays in gravitational theories have been studied for more than
forty years [356–358], and even though these studies were carried out using semiclassical
techniques, there is a coherent picture that fits well with string theory. The decay proceeds
by means of the nucleation of a bubble of one vacuum in the background of the original
vacuum. In the string landscape there would be a huge number of vacua being constantly
nucleated, providing an example of eternal inflation (for a review of eternal inflation see
[359]). In type IIB flux compactifications, the bubble wall would correspond to fivebranes
wrapping the relevant three-cycles.52 The Euclidean formalism of [356] then seems to imply
that the bubble universe would be an open universe. If true, this would be a concrete
prediction of the landscape (see for instance [360]). Populating this landscape could allow
one of the bubbles to correspond to a universe with a cosmological constant consistent with
current observations.
Overall, the measure problem and the dynamics of populating the landscape are complex and subtle questions that are not well-understood, but that could have significant impact on our understanding of cosmology. For recent discussions see for instance [361–372].
A cosmological constant appears to be the simplest explanation for the dark energy,
but the reality may be more complicated. Current observations are also consistent with
the idea of quintessence, in which an ultralight scalar field is slowly rolling today, driving
accelerated expansion. Note that even though runaway potentials are generic in string
theory, quintessence is not, because the potential needs to be very flat for the field to
roll slowly today. There have been several attempts to implement quintessence in flux
52

Ensuring that moduli remain stabilized across a bubble nucleation transition is an obstacle to populating a landscape dynamically in type IIB compactifications.

63

compactifications: see for instance [373–376] for early works, and [7, 193, 377–380] for
recent discussions of quintessence in string theory.

7

Axions

In an effective field theory, the lightest — and hence, often the most important — fields
are those whose mass terms are controlled by symmetries. The four-dimensional effective
theories resulting from Calabi-Yau orientifold compactifications of superstring theories always include the massless graviton, protected by general covariance, but also a number of
axions,53 i.e. pseudoscalars θ with approximate shift symmetries θ → θ + const. As we
have reviewed, moduli masses receive quantum corrections that typically put moduli out of
reach of terrestrial and astrophysical measurements: the hard task in moduli stabilization
is accurately computing the moduli masses, not establishing that they are generically large
compared to Standard Model scales. Finally, gauge bosons and chiral fermions are found
in many, but not all, compactifications. In this sense, the generic prediction of Calabi-Yau
flux compactifications, in the long-wavelength limit, is four-dimensional Einstein gravity
coupled to axion fields.
Axions are the subject of an immense array of experimental searches: through their interactions with light and matter on Earth, in the sun, in supernovae, in galaxies, and in the
CMB, as well as through their gravitational effects on structure formation. Because there
are so many paths to improved upper limits (or to a detection), in different environments
and relying on different physics and technology, it is clear that axion science will advance
rapidly in the coming decades.54 Combining this state of affairs with the near-inevitability
of axions in string theory, we conclude that axions furnish one of the most promising paths
to testing string theory.

7.1

Axions in string theory

Axions in string theory55 result from dimensional reduction of p-form potentials on p-cycles.
Consider a term in the ten-dimensional action of the form
Z
SCp = dCp ∧ ⋆dCp .
(188)
The action (188) is minimized if dCp = 0, and the equation of motion reads56
∆Cp = 0 ,
53

(189)

Some authors reserve the term ‘axion’ for a particular pseudoscalar coupled to QCD, and refer to other
shift-symmetric pseudoscalars as ‘axion-like particles’, but we will not follow this usage: we will speak of
many axions, one of which is the QCD axion.
54
See [381] for a review of the physics of axions.
55
See e.g. [311, 382–384] for early works on axion couplings in string theory.
56
To reach the form (189), one imposes the gauge-fixing condition d† Cp = 0, where d† := − ⋆ d⋆ is the
adjoint exterior derivative.

64

where ∆ is the Laplacian acting on p-forms. The solutions to (189) correspond, by Hodge’s
theorem, to cohomology classes in H p (X, R).
Topologically trivial changes in the field configuration of the potential Cp — i.e., changes
Cp → Cp + dAp−1 , with Ap−1 a (p − 1)-form, are gauge redundancies, and in particular the
action (188) is invariant. However, a change in the cohomology class of Cp , Cp → Cp +c ωp ,
with c ∈ R and with ωp ∈ H p (X, Z), can be detected by a suitable object charged under
Cp . The Wilson line in Maxwell theory is an example for p = 1.
In type IIB string theory, we will focus on the case p = 4, with C4 the RamondRamond four-form. We take ωa to be a basis of H 4 (X, Z), with ω a the dual homology
basis. Euclidean D3-branes wrapping four-cycles D couple to C4 as in (34), and so writing
an integral divisor class D = da ω a in terms of integers da , we have
Z
1
C4 .
(190)
SED3 = Vol(D) + ida
2π
ωa
Under Cp → Cp + ca ωa , the Euclidean D3-brane action (190) shifts as
SED3 → SED3 + 2πica da .

(191)

Integral shifts remain a symmetry even in the presence of Euclidean D3-branes, but the
continuous shift symmetry is broken.
To examine the corresponding four-dimensional axions, we make the ansatz
C4 = θa (x)ωa ,

(192)

with ωa a basis of H 4 (X, Z), and find
Z
Z
√
2
4
a
b
SCp = −Mpl d x −g ∂µ θ ∂ν θ
ωa ∧ ⋆ωb .

(193)

X

The pairing
Z

1 ∂ ∂
1 tree 1 ∂ ∂
=
ωa ∧ ⋆ωb = Kab
Ktree = −
log(V)
2
4 ∂τa ∂τb
2 ∂τa ∂τb
X

(194)

thus defines the matrix of kinetic couplings of the axions θa . In (194) we have compared
to the tree-level kinetic terms derived in §3.5.1, using (46) and (49), and the derivatives
are to be evaluated using (51).
The axions θa have no non-derivative interactions to any order in the gs and α′ expansions: their potential arises exclusively from non-perturbative effects. This structure is a
consequence of the ten-dimensional gauge symmetry, and does not rely on supersymmetry.
Moduli, in contrast, do generally receive contributions to their potential at (almost) all
orders in both perturbative expansions.
At first glance one might guess that perturbative quantum effects should be easier to
compute than non-perturbative quantum effects — if so, the moduli potential would be
more accessible to theoretical understanding than the axion potential. It is true that some
65

of the leading perturbative corrections to the effective action are well-understood, and it
is also true that a genuinely exact and systematic computation of the non-perturbative
potential for axions has not yet been performed. Even so, the axion shift symmetries are
so powerful that at the time of writing, much more is known about the structure of the
axion potential, and the resulting physics at low energies, than about the corresponding
questions for moduli.

7.2

Kreuzer-Skarke axiverse

Let us try to understand this state of affairs in the well-studied case of C4 axions, which
result from the expansion C4 = θa ωa with ωa a basis for the orientifold-even subspace
H+4 (X6 , Z). The actions S of the Euclidean D3-branes that give the dominant potential
terms are determined by the volumes of the wrapped four-cycles D, up to logarithmic
corrections from Pfaffians involving the other moduli:

Re(S) = 2πVol(D) − log A(zi , τ ) .
(195)
If one makes the further assumption that supersymmetry is weakly broken by the expectation value W0 of the flux superpotential, then the dominant Euclidean D3-branes are those
that contribute to the superpotential.57 These Euclidean D3-branes wrap holomorphic
four-cycles, which are calibrated by the Kähler form J and so have volumes that are given
algebraically in terms of the data of the Kähler parameters and intersection numbers,
Z
1
1
J ∧ J = κabc tb tc .
(196)
Vol(Da ) =
2 Da
2

The geometric data of four-cycle volumes is then readily accessible. In contrast, computing
the volume of a non-holomorphic four-cycle would require knowing, and integrating, the
volume form determined by the Calabi-Yau metric: this could be attempted by building
on the metrics obtained in [386–393], but has not been carried out.
In view of the results of §3.4.2, computing WED3 at a given point in T ⋆ in Kähler
moduli space involves enumerating the smallest effective divisors at T ⋆ that support two
fermion zero modes, as in (37). Thus, the leading exponentials are determined by knowing
topological and geometric data. From the leading exponentials alone one cannot compute
the exact axion potential, but nonetheless one can obtain enough information to make
meaningful comparisons to experiments.
In summary, the four-dimensional effective action for axions can be computed with
knowledge of the topological data of a Calabi-Yau orientifold, together with the specification of a point T ⋆ in Kähler moduli space. In a complete top-down derivation one would
compute the potential for Kähler moduli, find its minimum Tmin , and study axion couplings
there. At present Kähler moduli stabilization can be performed only in certain lamppost
57

We set aside the exotic possibility of parametrically large recombination of non-holomorphic cycles
[385].

66

regions of moduli space, where for example the KKLT or LVS approaches are applicable.
One approach is to fix a scenario and study the axion couplings, as done in [394] for LVS.58
Alternatively, one can take advantage of the fact that computing the data of axion
effective theories is feasible in a much broader swath of moduli space than the lampposts
where moduli stabilization is understood. One can thus aim to characterize axion couplings
in string theory by searching for results that hold everywhere in Kähler moduli space, or
that are at least approximately independent of location.59
More precisely, one seeks results that hold, or hold to some level of approximation,
everywhere in the subregion of moduli space where computations are controlled. Near the
walls of the extended Kähler cone, α′ corrections to the effective action are Rlarge, and the
axion kinetic term is not necessarily
R well-approximated by the couplings ω ∧ ⋆ω that
result from the leading-order term dC4 ∧ ⋆dC4 in the ten-dimensional action. Moreover,
near loci where divisors shrink, the associated instanton series are poorly controlled, and
the axion potential is not a sum of exponentially small periodic terms.
Following [396], we define the stretched Kähler cone as the subregion of the Kähler cone
in which all effective curves have volume ≥ 1:


Z
1,1
K := J ∈ H (X6 , R)
J >1 ∀C ,
(197)
C

where the condition is imposed for all effective curves C ∈ H2 (X6 , Z), and we work in units
of ℓ2s = (2π)2 α′ .
Within the stretched Kähler cone, and in the approximation that the scale of supersymmetry breaking is small compared to the cutoff of the effective theory, the axion kinetic
term is determined by classical geometric data, and the dominant potential terms breaking the PQ symmetries arise from the Euclidean D3-brane superpotential WED3 . Thus, a
systematic computation of the leading terms in the effective theory of C4 axions60 reduces
to an algorithmic procedure in computational geometry. In the case that the Calabi-Yau
threefold X is a hypersurface in a toric variety, this procedure is actually feasible, and can
even be automated: see the discussion in §8.
The Kreuzer-Skarke axiverse [396] is the resulting ensemble of axion effective theories
from Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface compactifications of type IIB string theory, with
1 ≤ h1,1 ≤ 491. A striking property of this ensemble is that the cycle volumes manifest
hierarchies that are polynomial in h1,1 . An intuitive explanation is that complicated topology does not easily fit into a small (and Ricci-flat) space, while a quantitative explanation
in terms of systems of linear inequalities is given in [396]. One empirical result is that —
58

A recent treatment appears in [395].
Alternatively, one can pursue constraints that result from sampling the moduli space according to a
natural measure.
60
The masses and couplings of the saxions τa = Vol(Da ) vary across the Kähler moduli space. A reasonable expectation is that near the walls of the Kähler cone, competition among perturbative corrections
to the Kähler potential, as in (97), could lead to stabilization of the saxions, though computing the saxion
potential in detail is presently out of reach. If the saxions are stabilized by perturbative effects, they will
be much heavier than the axions, and will be comparatively decoupled from low-energy phenomena.
59

67

at a reference location in moduli space, the tip of the stretched Kähler cone — certain
divisor volumes61 scale as
4
Vol(DA ) ∝ h1,1 ,
(198)

though it should be understood that the scatter around (198) is significant [396].
As a result of (198), the Kreuzer-Skarke axiverse has important qualitative differences
from that envisioned in the first discussions of the string axiverse [397]. In both cases
there are hundreds of axions ϕa with masses ma spanning a huge range of scales,62 but
the distributions of decay constants fa are very different. The original scenario of [397]
proposed decay constants clustered around a high scale,
String Axiverse [397]: fa ∼ MGUT ≈ 2 × 1016 GeV .

(199)

In simple Calabi-Yau compactifications that have only a single axion, fa is indeed typically
large, and so an axiverse modeled as N ≫ 1 copies of such single axions would have a
narrow distribution of decay constants fa . However, it turns out that topologically complex
Calabi-Yau threefolds manifest geometric hierarchies, as in (198). As a consequence, the
decay constants fa in the Kreuzer-Skarke axiverse spread over a wide range of scales, with
Kreuzer-Skarke Axiverse [396]: O(109 ) GeV ≲ fa ≲ O(1016 ) GeV .

(200)

This finding changes the axion phenomenology as well as the prospects for detection, as
we now explain.

7.3

Strong CP problem

One important issue that can be understood in this approach is the strong CP problem. The
neutron electric dipole moment is so small that it has never been measured. In quantum
field theory without gravity, its smallness can be explained, as suggested by Peccei and
Quinn (PQ), by introducing an axion that dynamically relaxes the CP-breaking θ-angle of
QCD. However, this solution is very sensitive to quantum gravity corrections: even rather
high-dimension Planck-suppressed operators spoil the PQ mechanism. This weakness of
the PQ mechanism is called the quality problem.
Because the success or failure of the PQ mechanism for solving the strong CP problem hinges on quantum gravity effects, one should compute these effects directly in an
ultraviolet completion of gravity. This was achieved in [398], in the setting of type IIB
compactifications on orientifolds of Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces, in the geometric regime. If
QCD is realized on a stack of D7-branes wrapping a four-cycle DQCD , the QCD axion is
Z
θQCD =
C4 .
(201)
DQCD

61
More precisely, in every basis of H4 (X, Z, at least one (and often, more than one) basis element has
size at least as large as (198): see [396] for further details.
62
Light axions are both theoretically natural, because their mass originates from a non-perturbative
effect, and experimentally allowed: light parity-even spinless fields (i.e., scalars) are strongly constrained
by experimental limits on fifth forces, but light pseudoscalars are not.

68

The terms in the effective action that spoil PQ quality arise from instantons — specifically,
Euclidean D3-branes — that carry PQ charge. Applying the methods reviewed in §8, one
can enumerate the leading Euclidean D3-brane superpotential terms, which for a four-cycle
DA take the form
a
WED3 = AA e−2πQ A Ta .
(202)
The importance of (202) at a given point in Kähler moduli space falls exponentially with
Vol(DA ) = Re(TA ). Inside the stretched Kähler cone — i.e., in the region of moduli space
where the α′ expansion is under control — the four-cycle volumes Vol(DA ) are hierarchical:
a few are ≈ O(1)ℓ4s but a majority scale as in (198). The resulting mass of the QCD axion,
and hence the shift of the QCD θ-angle θ̄ away from the CP-conserving value θ̄ = 0, was
computed63 in a large ensemble of explicit geometries in [398], with the result


θ̄ ∝ exp −cN 4 ,
(203)

with N = h1,1 the number of axions, and equivalently the number of Kähler moduli.
We reiterate that (203) contains explicit upper bounds on the leading quantum gravity
contributions to θ̄.64 Thus, in models with N ≳ 15 axions, everywhere in moduli space
where the α′ expansion is under control, the strong CP problem is solved by the PecceiQuinn mechanism.
It does not follow that (type IIB) string theory predicts that the strong CP problem is
automatically solved in general, because we have no knowledge of θ̄ in the regime where
cycles are small and instanton corrections are large. Rather, one can say that Calabi-Yau
orientifold compactifications of type IIB string theory, in the geometric regime, furnish
an ultraviolet completion of gravity that exhibits an automatic solution of the strong CP
problem. Although this solution applies only if h1,1 ≳ 15, the overwhelming majority of
known Calabi-Yau threefolds do have h1,1 > 15.65

7.4

Axion-photon couplings

An impressive collection of experiments are searching for axions through their couplings
to the photon, for example through X-ray spectrum oscillations (see e.g. [399–401]), CMB
birefringence, or production in the Sun or the Milky Way. For N canonically-normalized
axions φa with decay constants fa , the couplings can be written
1
L ⊃ − gaγγ φa Fµν F̃ µν ,
4
63

(204)

The phenomenological scaling of (198) helps explain the result of [398], but was not used as an input
in [398]: the four-cycle volumes were directly computed in each case.
64
The technical assumptions entering (203) are laid out in [398], and are fairly modest: supersymmetry
breaking should be well below the compactification scale, and there should be no light states charged under
QCD except those from the Standard Model and their superpartners.
65
Strictly speaking, this statement applies to counts of Calabi-Yau threefolds that are potentially inequivalent, but have not yet been proven to be distinct: cf. [136].

69

with

αEM
Θa (no sum) .
(205)
2πfa
where Θa is a dimensionless coupling that results from a mixing angle.
Let us temporarily suppose that the mixing angles Θa are O(1), or at least are not
hierarchically small. Then the finding that in Calabi-Yau compactifications with many
axions [396, 402], the decay constants spread down to small scales, f ∼ O(109 ) GeV, as
in (200), suggests that such theories could easily be ruled out by near-future limits on
axion-photon couplings.
It turns out, however, that the mixing angles Θa are not of order unity [342, 403].
Two mechanisms are responsible: first, the kinetic matrix is very sparse, as a result of
the structure of divisor intersections [403]. Second, Euclidean D3-branes wrapping the
four-cycle that supports QED generate a small mass scale, and any axions lighter than this
light threshold have hierarchically suppressed couplings to the photon [342].
The picture that emerges is of an axiverse that is mostly dark, but in which a handful
of axions have couplings to photons that put them in reach of ongoing observations [381,
404–406].
gaγγ =

7.5

Black hole superradiance

Black hole superradiance is another phenomenon that connects the string axiverse to observations [407, 408]. An axion field whose Compton wavelength is comparable to the
Schwarzschild radius of a Kerr black hole will develop a superradiant instability and extract angular momentum from the black hole, unless nonlinear self-interactions of the axion
disrupt the development of a condensate. Thus, upper bounds on the spins of astrophysical black holes set limits on the existence of axions in a range of mass m and interaction
strength (i.e., decay constant) f . These limits do not involve any cosmological assumptions: the axions need not be produced in cosmic history, or persist as a relic population.
The axions are created from the vacuum by the black hole, so what is tested is whether
such fields are present in the Lagrangian. For stellar-mass black holes, for which the data
is better at present, the exclusions are in the vicinity of m ≈ 10−10 eV, and apply for
f ≳ 1014 GeV.
Black hole superradiance in string theory was studied in [402]: the spectrum of C4
masses and decay constants was computed in an ensemble of type IIB compactifications
on Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces, and were compared to measured black hole spins.
For this purpose the Kähler moduli were taken at certain reference locations, such as the
tip of the stretched Kähler cone. A considerable fraction of geometries at these points in
moduli space are excluded by observations.

8

Computational advances

The study of flux compactifications rests on computation. To construct a Calabi-Yau threefold X6 and determine the leading-order data of the N = 2 effective theory that results
70

from a type IIB compactification on X6 , one can start by identifying a suitable ambient
space, such as a projective space or a more general toric variety; defining the Calabi-Yau
as a subvariety; and computing the Hodge numbers and intersection numbers. One then
determines the region of moduli space where this description is valid, for example by computing the Kähler cone associated to the given geometric phase. The exact prepotential for
the vector multiplet moduli space is obtained by computing the periods of the (3, 0) form
e6 and making use
on X6 , while computing the periods of the (3, 0) form on the mirror X
of mirror symmetry furnishes a subset of non-perturbative corrections to the hypermultiplet moduli space. Proceeding to an N = 1 compactification requires a further series of
computations. One identifies an orientifold involution, makes a choice of quantized fluxes,
evaluates the flux superpotential in terms of the periods, and enumerates terms in the
non-perturbative superpotential by computing the topology of effective divisors.
The above computation yields that part of the data of the effective theory that is either
classical, holomorphic, or both — in particular, the Käher potential at leading order in gs
and α′ , and the classical plus non-perturbative superpotential. Approximating the effective
theory using only classical plus holomorphic data is a useful starting point at weak coupling
and large volume, where perturbative corrections are small. But it is also important to
recognize the disparity between the task of computing classical plus holomorphic data,
and that of computing perturbative corrections. The steps in the former undertaking, as
enumerated above, are all well-specified computations in algebraic geometry and topology.
In some cases these might be intractable, or become expensive when the dimension of
moduli space is large, but they can at least be stated precisely to a person (or computer)
unfamiliar with string theory. Moreover, the questions are generally algebraic or topological
in character, rather than analytic.
In contrast, string perturbation theory is incompletely formulated, especially in general flux backgrounds. Sigma model perturbation theory is hardly better, and evaluating
curvature corrections eventually requires computing the curvature of the Ricci-flat metric.
Significant progress in characterizing perturbative corrections may require fundamental
advances in string theory, and at a minimum will require the application of expertise in
highly technical areas of string theory. In summary, the task of computing perturbative
corrections remains a physics problem, whereas that of computing the classical plus holomorphic data has been sharpened — by efforts beginning in the early days of supergravity
and string theory — into a mathematics problem.
The past decade has seen extraordinary progress in solving this mathematics problem,
and doing so automatically, at scale, and in the general case. Approaches to the problem
can be usefully classified into three generations. In the first, pencil and paper were the
dominant tool, so the the number of relevant moduli was necessarily very small: examples
include classic works on mirror symmetry for two-parameter models [409,410]. The second
generation is characterized by increasingly sophisticated computer assistance, but with algorithms whose expense grows exponentially in the number of moduli, so that O(10) moduli
is the upper limit (e.g., [411]). At this stage some codes were purpose-built for research
in string theory (e.g., cohomCalg [412]), while others used general-purpose computational

71

geometry and computational algebra software such as Sage and PALP [413].
The third, and current, generation is characterized by the emergence of new algorithms
whose cost is only polynomial, allowing for the first time the study of examples with hundreds or thousands of moduli, as well as the construction of large ensembles of compactifications, for example across the entire Kreuzer-Skarke list. Third-generation approaches
to computing intersection numbers, Mori and Kähler cones, and other classical data of
Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces are built into version 1.0 of the software CYTools [98].
Third-generation algorithms for computing period integrals and Gopakumar-Vafa invariants through the mirror map appeared in [89], while orientifolding at this level was demonstrated in [24]; both capabilities will be integrated into a future release of CYTools. Another characteristic of the third generation of tools is the application of methods of machine
learning, which has led to significant progress in e.g. the computation of Ricci-flat metrics
on compact Calabi-Yau threefolds [386–393]. Machine learning has also been applied to
explore other aspects of Calabi-Yau geometry in e.g. [414–422]; for a review, see [423].
Toric geometry is at the heart of much recent progress in computing topological data of
string compactifications. A fine, regular, star triangulation of any of the 473,800,776 reflexive polytopes in the Kreuzer-Skarke list [424] defines a toric variety in which the generic
anticanonical hypersurface is a smooth Calabi-Yau threefold. Much of the topology of
the hypersurface is inherited from the ambient toric variety, and can be read off from the
triangulation. Toric geometry thus provides a combinatorial approach to Calabi-Yau compactifications. Advances in triangulation algorithms [98, 425], combined with applications
of general results in toric geometry [24, 89], have led to polynomial-time approaches to
problems that were inaccessible with general computational algebraic geometry methods.
All the classical data, and nearly all the holomorphic data, of a type IIB compactification66 on a Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface is accessible by the above methods, but
the Pfaffian prefactors of Euclidean D3-brane or gaugino condensate superpotential terms
require separate treatment. In toroidal models the full moduli-dependence of these factors can be computed on the worldsheet [44]. The dependence on D3-brane positions is
well-understood in local models [427], and was recently computed in an orientifold of a
compact elliptic Calabi-Yau threefold [46]. A systematic method for computing the moduli dependence of the Pfaffian of any rigid Euclidean Dp-brane was developed in [47]. The
normalization of the contribution of a rigid Euclidean Dp-brane was fixed in [428], building
on a series of works treating the normalization of Euclidean Dp-brane amplitudes [429–431].
Even once the data of an effective theory is in hand, exploring the resulting landscape of vacua is computationally challenging: one often faces exponentially many possible
choices of flux, and a scalar potential depending on hundreds of moduli and axions.67 The
JAXVacua framework [440], which deploys modern computational methods including automatic differentiation and just-in-time compilation, marks a significant advance in the
computational frontier of moduli stabilization. For recent applications, see [189, 441].
66

Related capabilities for F-theory models are provided by FTheoryTools [426].
It was argued in [432–434] that although the flux landscape is very large, it is finite, but the arguments
are not yet conclusive. The construction and enumeration of flux vacua was pursued in e.g. [198, 435–438],
and techniques for computation in axion landscapes were developed in [439].
67

72

9

Conclusions

The past two decades have seen striking advances in moduli stabilization, which is a prerequisite for any attempt to connect string theory to low-energy experiments. In this work
we have surveyed the leading approaches towards the still-distant goal of stabilization in
cosmologically realistic vacua.
The moduli stabilization mechanisms that we have reviewed invoke a common set of
sources that contribute to lifting the moduli spaces found in Calabi-Yau vacuum configurations. These sources include quantized fluxes, D-brane and orientifold configurations, and
perturbative and non-perturbative quantum effects. Crucially, these sources are not ad-hoc
modifications of the theory: they are instead necessary components of general compactifications. Setting the fluxes to zero, rather than to one of the vast number of nonzero values
allowed by consistency, is a fine-tuning. Similarly, as in any physical system, quantum
effects are not optional. Compactifications in which all such sources are omitted generally
preserve more supersymmetry, are easier to analyze, and hence were the first to be understood. This state of affairs is akin to the historical development of cosmology, in which
maximally symmetric vacuum spacetimes were understood long before realistic inhomogeneous universes. Likewise, the rich landscape of modern string compactifications is built
on the older foundation of moduli spaces of highly-supersymmetric solutions.
The art of moduli stabilization lies not in finding contributions to the scalar potential
for the moduli — indeed, such terms are unavoidable in generic compactifications — but
in identifying resulting minima that occur in a region of computational control. The DineSeiberg problem indicates that arbitrarily precise control is only guaranteed in the region
of moduli space where the scalar potential is a runaway, and so non-trivial vacua most
naturally appear in regions of strong coupling.68
Fortunately, the landscape of topological choices — of quantized fluxes, D-brane configurations, and the underlying compactification topology — is vast enough to allow for
solutions that are controllable. The specific moduli stabilization scenarios that we reviewed, such as KKLT and LVS, involve strategic choices that cause minima to appear in
computable parameter regimes. The necessary choices are discrete fine-tunings, but they
are achievable. For example, the selection of flux quanta giving a small classical flux superpotential in the KKLT scenario leads to a vacuum in which the Calabi-Yau volume is
large, and this can be accomplished in actual examples [80].
The task of ensuring that all approximations are under control remains the key technical frontier of moduli stabilization. With each advance in understanding corrections
to the four-dimensional EFTs of string compactifications, one can reduce the theory errors in existing constructions, or pursue new constructions that furnish a broader and less
fine-tuned class of stabilized vacua. Despite the achievements of recent years, the number of actual solutions that have been constructed is extremely small compared to the
68

Nature has been kind to us in furnishing weak couplings at high energies: recall that with the spectrum
of the Standard Model, all three gauge couplings are weak at energies close to the Planck scale (the QED
Landau pole is at exponentially larger energies). This suggests that perhaps the ultraviolet-complete
theory will allow weakly-coupled vacua at high energies.

73

astronomical number of compactifications known to exist. Moreover, much of what is now
understood applies under particular lampposts, such as the geometric regime in Ricci-flat
compactifications. Whole realms of vacua lie undiscovered.
Finally, arguably the most important problem in moduli stabilization is obtaining de
Sitter solutions that account for the observed acceleration of the universe. We have seen
no meaningful evidence of any fundamental obstacle to the existence of de Sitter vacua.
However, much work remains to establish a landscape of de Sitter vacua in totally explicit
and precisely-controlled compactifications of string theory.
The new computational techniques reviewed in §8 may prove crucial for addressing these
questions, for systematically constructing more general classes of flux compactifications,
and eventually for establishing the structure of cosmological solutions of string theory.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Carlo Angelantonj and Ignatios Antoniadis, and all the editors
of the Handbook on Quantum Gravity, for inviting us to write this review, and for their
infinite patience through many delays. We also thank Shamit Kachru for early collaboration on this project. We are grateful to Michele Cicoli, Joe Conlon, Naomi Gendler,
Jim Halverson, Manki Kim, Sven Krippendorf, David J.E. Marsh, Raffaele Savelli, Elijah
Sheridan, Pramod Shukla, Roberto Valandro, and Timm Wrase for comments on a preliminary draft, and we particularly thank Jakob Moritz and Andreas Schachner for many
corrections. The work of L.M. was supported in part by NSF grant PHY–2014071.

References
[1] T. Kaluza, “Zum Unitätsproblem der Physik,” Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss.
Berlin (Math. Phys. ) 1921 (1921) 966–972, arXiv:1803.08616
[physics.hist-ph].
[2] O. Klein, “Quantum Theory and Five-Dimensional Theory of Relativity. (In
German and English),” Z. Phys. 37 (1926) 895–906.
[3] M. Grana, “Flux compactifications in string theory: a comprehensive review,”
Phys. Rept. 423 (2006) 91–158, arXiv:hep-th/0509003.
[4] M. R. Douglas and S. Kachru, “Flux compactification,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 79 (2007)
733–796, arXiv:hep-th/0610102.
[5] A. Hebecker, Naturalness, String Landscape and Multiverse: A Modern Introduction
with Exercises, vol. 979 of Lecture Notes in Physics. 2021.
[6] D. Baumann and L. McAllister, Inflation and String Theory. Cambridge
Monographs on Mathematical Physics. Cambridge University Press, 5, 2015.
arXiv:1404.2601 [hep-th].
74

[7] M. Cicoli, J. P. Conlon, A. Maharana, S. Parameswaran, F. Quevedo, and
I. Zavala, “String Cosmology: from the Early Universe to Today,”
arXiv:2303.04819 [hep-th].
[8] A. Tomasiello, Geometry of String Theory Compactifications. Cambridge University
Press, 1, 2022.
[9] M. R. Douglas and L. McAllister, “Compactification of Superstring Theory.” To
appear in the Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics, 2nd edition.
[10] B. S. Acharya, “Supersymmetry, Ricci Flat Manifolds and the String Landscape,”
JHEP 08 (2020) 128, arXiv:1906.06886 [hep-th].
[11] C. P. Burgess, M. Cicoli, D. Ciupke, S. Krippendorf, and F. Quevedo, “UV
Shadows in EFTs: Accidental Symmetries, Robustness and No-Scale Supergravity,”
Fortsch. Phys. 68 no. 10, (2020) 2000076, arXiv:2006.06694 [hep-th].
[12] M. Cicoli, F. Quevedo, R. Savelli, A. Schachner, and R. Valandro, “Systematics of
the α′ expansion in F-theory,” JHEP 08 (2021) 099, arXiv:2106.04592 [hep-th].
[13] G. Policastro and D. Tsimpis, “R**4, purified,” Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006)
4753–4780, arXiv:hep-th/0603165.
[14] G. Policastro and D. Tsimpis, “A Note on the quartic effective action of type IIB
superstring,” Class. Quant. Grav. 26 (2009) 125001, arXiv:0812.3138 [hep-th].
[15] J. T. Liu, R. Minasian, R. Savelli, and A. Schachner, “Type IIB at eight
derivatives: insights from Superstrings, Superfields and Superparticles,” JHEP 08
(2022) 267, arXiv:2205.11530 [hep-th].
[16] K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh, and S. Sethi, “M theory, orientifolds and G - flux,” JHEP
08 (1999) 023, arXiv:hep-th/9908088.
[17] S. B. Giddings, S. Kachru, and J. Polchinski, “Hierarchies from fluxes in string
compactifications,” Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002) 106006, arXiv:hep-th/0105097.
[18] F. Carta, J. Moritz, and A. Westphal, “A landscape of orientifold vacua,” JHEP 05
(2020) 107, arXiv:2003.04902 [hep-th].
[19] T. W. Grimm and J. Louis, “The Effective action of N = 1 Calabi-Yau
orientifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 699 (2004) 387–426, arXiv:hep-th/0403067.
[20] T. W. Grimm, “Non-Perturbative Corrections and Modularity in N=1 Type IIB
Compactifications,” JHEP 10 (2007) 004, arXiv:0705.3253 [hep-th].
[21] L. McAllister, E. Silverstein, and A. Westphal, “Gravity Waves and Linear Inflation
from Axion Monodromy,” Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 046003, arXiv:0808.0706
[hep-th].
75

[22] X. Gao and P. Shukla, “On Classifying the Divisor Involutions in Calabi-Yau
Threefolds,” JHEP 11 (2013) 170, arXiv:1307.1139 [hep-th].
[23] A. Hebecker, S. Leonhardt, J. Moritz, and A. Westphal, “Thraxions: Ultralight
Throat Axions,” JHEP 04 (2019) 158, arXiv:1812.03999 [hep-th].
[24] J. Moritz, “Orientifolding Kreuzer-Skarke,” arXiv:2305.06363 [hep-th].
[25] E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, and A. Van Proeyen, “Yang-Mills Theories
with Local Supersymmetry: Lagrangian, Transformation Laws and SuperHiggs
Effect,” Nucl. Phys. B 212 (1983) 413.
[26] T. Kugo and S. Uehara, “Improved Superconformal Gauge Conditions in the N = 1
Supergravity Yang-Mills Matter System,” Nucl. Phys. B 222 (1983) 125–138.
[27] E. Witten, “New Issues in Manifolds of SU(3) Holonomy,” Nucl. Phys. B 268
(1986) 79.
[28] C. P. Burgess, A. Font, and F. Quevedo, “Low-Energy Effective Action for the
Superstring,” Nucl. Phys. B 272 (1986) 661–676.
[29] M. Dine and N. Seiberg, “Nonrenormalization Theorems in Superstring Theory,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 (1986) 2625.
[30] C. P. Burgess, C. Escoda, and F. Quevedo, “Nonrenormalization of flux
superpotentials in string theory,” JHEP 06 (2006) 044, arXiv:hep-th/0510213.
[31] S. Kachru, M. B. Schulz, P. K. Tripathy, and S. P. Trivedi, “New supersymmetric
string compactifications,” JHEP 03 (2003) 061, arXiv:hep-th/0211182.
[32] B. Wecht, “Lectures on Nongeometric Flux Compactifications,” Class. Quant.
Grav. 24 (2007) S773–S794, arXiv:0708.3984 [hep-th].
[33] D. Andriot, O. Hohm, M. Larfors, D. Lust, and P. Patalong, “A geometric action
for non-geometric fluxes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 261602, arXiv:1202.3060
[hep-th].
[34] E. Plauschinn, “Non-geometric backgrounds in string theory,” Phys. Rept. 798
(2019) 1–122, arXiv:1811.11203 [hep-th].
[35] S. B. Giddings and A. Maharana, “Dynamics of warped compactifications and the
shape of the warped landscape,” Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 126003,
arXiv:hep-th/0507158.
[36] M. R. Douglas, “Effective potential and warp factor dynamics,” JHEP 03 (2010)
071, arXiv:0911.3378 [hep-th].

76

[37] S. Gukov, C. Vafa, and E. Witten, “CFT’s from Calabi-Yau four folds,” Nucl.
Phys. B 584 (2000) 69–108, arXiv:hep-th/9906070. [Erratum: Nucl.Phys.B 608,
477–478 (2001)].
[38] E. Witten, “Nonperturbative superpotentials in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 474
(1996) 343–360, arXiv:hep-th/9604030.
[39] N. Gendler, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and M. Stillman, “Superpotentials
from singular divisors,” JHEP 11 (2022) 142, arXiv:2204.06566 [hep-th].
[40] T. W. Grimm, M. Kerstan, E. Palti, and T. Weigand, “On Fluxed Instantons and
Moduli Stabilisation in IIB Orientifolds and F-theory,” Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011)
066001, arXiv:1105.3193 [hep-th].
[41] M. Bianchi, A. Collinucci, and L. Martucci, “Magnetized E3-brane instantons in
F-theory,” JHEP 12 (2011) 045, arXiv:1107.3732 [hep-th].
[42] M. Bianchi, A. Collinucci, and L. Martucci, “Freezing E3-brane instantons with
fluxes,” Fortsch. Phys. 60 (2012) 914–920, arXiv:1202.5045 [hep-th].
[43] M. Bianchi, G. Inverso, and L. Martucci, “Brane instantons and fluxes in
F-theory,” JHEP 07 (2013) 037, arXiv:1212.0024 [hep-th].
[44] M. Berg, M. Haack, and B. Kors, “Loop corrections to volume moduli and inflation
in string theory,” Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 026005, arXiv:hep-th/0404087.
[45] D. Baumann and L. McAllister, “A Microscopic Limit on Gravitational Waves from
D-brane Inflation,” Phys. Rev. D 75 (2007) 123508, arXiv:hep-th/0610285.
[46] M. Kim, “On D3-brane Superpotential,” arXiv:2207.01440 [hep-th].
[47] M. Kim, “D-instanton, threshold corrections, and topological string,” JHEP 05
(2023) 097, arXiv:2301.03602 [hep-th].
[48] M. Cvetic, R. Donagi, J. Halverson, and J. Marsano, “On Seven-Brane Dependent
Instanton Prefactors in F-theory,” JHEP 11 (2012) 004, arXiv:1209.4906
[hep-th].
[49] O. J. Ganor, “A Note on zeros of superpotentials in F theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 499
(1997) 55–66, arXiv:hep-th/9612077.
[50] F. Denef, “Les Houches Lectures on Constructing String Vacua,” Les Houches 87
(2008) 483–610, arXiv:0803.1194 [hep-th].
[51] T. Weigand, “F-theory,” PoS TASI2017 (2018) 016, arXiv:1806.01854
[hep-th].

77

[52] R. Blumenhagen, A. Collinucci, and B. Jurke, “On Instanton Effects in F-theory,”
JHEP 08 (2010) 079, arXiv:1002.1894 [hep-th].
[53] M. Cvetic, I. Garcia Etxebarria, and J. Halverson, “Three Looks at Instantons in
F-theory – New Insights from Anomaly Inflow, String Junctions and Heterotic
Duality,” JHEP 11 (2011) 101, arXiv:1107.2388 [hep-th].
[54] R. Blumenhagen, M. Cvetic, S. Kachru, and T. Weigand, “D-Brane Instantons in
Type II Orientifolds,” Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 59 (2009) 269–296,
arXiv:0902.3251 [hep-th].
[55] E. Witten, “Five-brane effective action in M theory,” J. Geom. Phys. 22 (1997)
103–133, arXiv:hep-th/9610234.
[56] E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas, and D. V. Nanopoulos, “Naturally Vanishing
Cosmological Constant in N=1 Supergravity,” Phys. Lett. B 133 (1983) 61.
[57] M. Berg, M. Haack, and B. Kors, “String loop corrections to Kahler potentials in
orientifolds,” JHEP 11 (2005) 030, arXiv:hep-th/0508043.
[58] M. Berg, M. Haack, and E. Pajer, “Jumping Through Loops: On Soft Terms from
Large Volume Compactifications,” JHEP 09 (2007) 031, arXiv:0704.0737
[hep-th].
[59] M. Cicoli, J. P. Conlon, and F. Quevedo, “Systematics of String Loop Corrections
in Type IIB Calabi-Yau Flux Compactifications,” JHEP 01 (2008) 052,
arXiv:0708.1873 [hep-th].
[60] M. Cicoli, J. P. Conlon, and F. Quevedo, “General Analysis of LARGE Volume
Scenarios with String Loop Moduli Stabilisation,” JHEP 10 (2008) 105,
arXiv:0805.1029 [hep-th].
[61] M. Berg, M. Haack, J. U. Kang, and S. Sjörs, “Towards the one-loop Kähler metric
of Calabi-Yau orientifolds,” JHEP 12 (2014) 077, arXiv:1407.0027 [hep-th].
[62] G. von Gersdorff and A. Hebecker, “Kahler corrections for the volume modulus of
flux compactifications,” Phys. Lett. B 624 (2005) 270–274, arXiv:hep-th/0507131.
[63] M. Grisaru, A. Van De Ven, and D. Zanon, “Four-loop divergences for the N=1
supersymmetric non-linear sigma-model in two dimensions,” Nuclear Physics B 277
(1986) 409–428.
[64] D. J. Gross and E. Witten, “Superstring modifications of einstein’s equations,”
Nuclear Physics B 277 (1986) 1–10.
[65] I. Antoniadis, S. Ferrara, R. Minasian, and K. S. Narain, “R**4 couplings in M and
type II theories on Calabi-Yau spaces,” Nucl. Phys. B 507 (1997) 571–588,
arXiv:hep-th/9707013.
78

[66] K. Becker, M. Becker, M. Haack, and J. Louis, “Supersymmetry breaking and
alpha-prime corrections to flux induced potentials,” JHEP 06 (2002) 060,
arXiv:hep-th/0204254.
[67] J. Halverson, H. Jockers, J. M. Lapan, and D. R. Morrison, “Perturbative
Corrections to Kaehler Moduli Spaces,” Commun. Math. Phys. 333 no. 3, (2015)
1563–1584, arXiv:1308.2157 [hep-th].
[68] T. W. Grimm, R. Savelli, and M. Weissenbacher, “On α′ corrections in N=1
F-theory compactifications,” Phys. Lett. B 725 (2013) 431–436, arXiv:1303.3317
[hep-th].
[69] T. W. Grimm, J. Keitel, R. Savelli, and M. Weissenbacher, “From M-theory higher
curvature terms to α′ corrections in F-theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 903 (2016) 325–359,
arXiv:1312.1376 [hep-th].
[70] D. Junghans and G. Shiu, “Brane curvature corrections to the N = 1 type
II/F-theory effective action,” JHEP 03 (2015) 107, arXiv:1407.0019 [hep-th].
[71] R. Minasian, T. G. Pugh, and R. Savelli, “F-theory at order α′3 ,” JHEP 10 (2015)
050, arXiv:1506.06756 [hep-th].
[72] M. Haack and J. U. Kang, “Field redefinitions and Kähler potential in string theory
at 1-loop,” JHEP 08 (2018) 019, arXiv:1805.00817 [hep-th].
[73] J. P. Conlon and F. G. Pedro, “Moduli Redefinitions and Moduli Stabilisation,”
JHEP 06 (2010) 082, arXiv:1003.0388 [hep-th].
[74] T. W. Grimm, K. Mayer, and M. Weissenbacher, “One-modulus Calabi-Yau
fourfold reductions with higher-derivative terms,” JHEP 04 (2018) 021,
arXiv:1712.07074 [hep-th].
[75] M. Weissenbacher, “F-theory vacua and α′ -corrections,” JHEP 04 (2020) 032,
arXiv:1901.04758 [hep-th].
[76] I. Antoniadis, Y. Chen, and G. K. Leontaris, “Logarithmic loop corrections, moduli
stabilisation and de Sitter vacua in string theory,” JHEP 01 (2020) 149,
arXiv:1909.10525 [hep-th].
[77] D. Klaewer, S.-J. Lee, T. Weigand, and M. Wiesner, “Quantum corrections in 4d N
= 1 infinite distance limits and the weak gravity conjecture,” JHEP 03 (2021) 252,
arXiv:2011.00024 [hep-th].
[78] C. P. Burgess and F. Quevedo, “RG-induced modulus stabilization: perturbative de
Sitter vacua and improved D3-D3 inflation,” JHEP 06 (2022) 167,
arXiv:2202.05344 [hep-th].
79

[79] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. D. Linde, and S. P. Trivedi, “De Sitter vacua in string
theory,” Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 046005, arXiv:hep-th/0301240.
[80] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and A. Rios-Tascon, “Small
cosmological constants in string theory,” JHEP 12 (2021) 136, arXiv:2107.09064
[hep-th].
[81] O. DeWolfe, L. McAllister, G. Shiu, and B. Underwood, “D3-brane Vacua in
Stabilized Compactifications,” JHEP 09 (2007) 121, arXiv:hep-th/0703088.
[82] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and A. Rios-Tascon,
“Exponentially Small Cosmological Constant in String Theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
128 no. 1, (2022) 011602, arXiv:2107.09065 [hep-th].
[83] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, and J. Moritz, “Vacua with Small Flux
Superpotential,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 no. 21, (2020) 211603, arXiv:1912.10047
[hep-th].
[84] F. Denef and M. R. Douglas, “Distributions of flux vacua,” JHEP 05 (2004) 072,
arXiv:hep-th/0404116.
[85] M. Ajtai, “The Shortest Vector Problem in L2 is NP-Hard for Randomized
Reductions,” in Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC ’98, p. 10–19. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1998.
[86] F. Denef and M. R. Douglas, “Computational complexity of the landscape. I.,”
Annals Phys. 322 (2007) 1096–1142, arXiv:hep-th/0602072.
[87] J. Halverson and F. Ruehle, “Computational Complexity of Vacua and Near-Vacua
in Field and String Theory,” Phys. Rev. D 99 no. 4, (2019) 046015,
arXiv:1809.08279 [hep-th].
[88] N. Bao, R. Bousso, S. Jordan, and B. Lackey, “Fast optimization algorithms and
the cosmological constant,” Phys. Rev. D 96 no. 10, (2017) 103512,
arXiv:1706.08503 [hep-th].
[89] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, and A. Rios-Tascon,
“Computational Mirror Symmetry,” arXiv:2303.00757 [hep-th].
[90] M. Cicoli, M. Licheri, R. Mahanta, and A. Maharana, “Flux vacua with
approximate flat directions,” JHEP 10 (2022) 086, arXiv:2209.02720 [hep-th].
[91] B. Bastian, T. W. Grimm, and D. van de Heisteeg, “Engineering small flux
superpotentials and mass hierarchies,” JHEP 02 (2023) 149, arXiv:2108.11962
[hep-th].
80

[92] N. Gendler, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, R. Nally, and A. Schachner, “Evidence for de
Sitter Vacua.” To appear.
[93] I. Broeckel, M. Cicoli, A. Maharana, K. Singh, and K. Sinha, “On the Search for
Low W0,” Fortsch. Phys. 70 no. 6, (2022) 2200002, arXiv:2108.04266 [hep-th].
[94] J. Halverson, M. Plesser, F. Ruehle, and J. Tian, “Kähler Moduli Stabilization and
the Propagation of Decidability,” Phys. Rev. D 101 no. 4, (2020) 046010,
arXiv:1911.07835 [hep-th].
[95] M. Kim, “D-instanton superpotential in string theory,” JHEP 03 (2022) 054,
arXiv:2201.04634 [hep-th].
[96] I. R. Klebanov and M. J. Strassler, “Supergravity and a confining gauge theory:
Duality cascades and chi SB resolution of naked singularities,” JHEP 08 (2000)
052, arXiv:hep-th/0007191.
[97] S. Kachru, J. Pearson, and H. L. Verlinde, “Brane / flux annihilation and the string
dual of a nonsupersymmetric field theory,” JHEP 06 (2002) 021,
arXiv:hep-th/0112197.
[98] M. Demirtas, A. Rios-Tascon, and L. McAllister, “CYTools: A Software Package
for Analyzing Calabi-Yau Manifolds,” arXiv:2211.03823 [hep-th].
[99] M. Kim, “A note on h2,1 of divisors in CY fourfolds. Part I,” JHEP 03 (2022) 168,
arXiv:2107.09779 [hep-th].
[100] P. Jefferson and M. Kim, “On the intermediate Jacobian of M5-branes,”
arXiv:2211.00210 [hep-th].
[101] M. Kim, “On one-loop corrected dilaton action in string theory,”
arXiv:2305.08263 [hep-th].
[102] M. Kim, “On string one-loop correction to the Einstein-Hilbert term and its
implications on the Kähler potential,” JHEP 07 (2023) 044, arXiv:2302.12117
[hep-th].
[103] R. Álvarez-Garcı́a, R. Blumenhagen, M. Brinkmann, and L. Schlechter, “Small
Flux Superpotentials for Type IIB Flux Vacua Close to a Conifold,” Fortsch. Phys.
68 (2020) 2000088, arXiv:2009.03325 [hep-th].
[104] M. Demirtas, M. Kim, L. McAllister, and J. Moritz, “Conifold Vacua with Small
Flux Superpotential,” Fortsch. Phys. 68 (2020) 2000085, arXiv:2009.03312
[hep-th].
[105] A. Hebecker, S. Schreyer, and G. Venken, “Curvature corrections to KPV: do we
need deep throats?,” JHEP 10 (2022) 166, arXiv:2208.02826 [hep-th].
81

[106] S. Schreyer and G. Venken, “α′ corrections to KPV: an uplifting story,” JHEP 07
(2023) 235, arXiv:2212.07437 [hep-th].
[107] P. Koerber and L. Martucci, “From ten to four and back again: How to generalize
the geometry,” JHEP 08 (2007) 059, arXiv:0707.1038 [hep-th].
[108] D. Amati, K. Konishi, Y. Meurice, G. C. Rossi, and G. Veneziano,
“Nonperturbative Aspects in Supersymmetric Gauge Theories,” Phys. Rept. 162
(1988) 169–248.
[109] G. Veneziano and S. Yankielowicz, “An Effective Lagrangian for the Pure N=1
Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory,” Phys. Lett. B 113 (1982) 231.
[110] I. Affleck, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, “Dynamical Supersymmetry Breaking in
Four-Dimensions and Its Phenomenological Implications,” Nucl. Phys. B 256
(1985) 557–599.
[111] C. P. Burgess, J. P. Derendinger, F. Quevedo, and M. Quiros, “On gaugino
condensation with field dependent gauge couplings,” Annals Phys. 250 (1996)
193–233, arXiv:hep-th/9505171.
[112] P. G. Camara, L. E. Ibanez, and A. M. Uranga, “Flux-induced SUSY-breaking soft
terms on D7-D3 brane systems,” Nucl. Phys. B 708 (2005) 268–316,
arXiv:hep-th/0408036.
[113] A. Dymarsky and L. Martucci, “D-brane non-perturbative effects and geometric
deformations,” JHEP 04 (2011) 061, arXiv:1012.4018 [hep-th].
[114] M. Grana, R. Minasian, M. Petrini, and A. Tomasiello, “Generalized structures of
N=1 vacua,” JHEP 11 (2005) 020, arXiv:hep-th/0505212.
[115] B. Heidenreich, L. McAllister, and G. Torroba, “Dynamic SU(2) Structure from
Seven-branes,” JHEP 05 (2011) 110, arXiv:1011.3510 [hep-th].
[116] D. Baumann, A. Dymarsky, S. Kachru, I. R. Klebanov, and L. McAllister,
“D3-brane Potentials from Fluxes in AdS/CFT,” JHEP 06 (2010) 072,
arXiv:1001.5028 [hep-th].
[117] J. Moritz, A. Retolaza, and A. Westphal, “Toward de Sitter space from ten
dimensions,” Phys. Rev. D 97 no. 4, (2018) 046010, arXiv:1707.08678 [hep-th].
[118] Y. Hamada, A. Hebecker, G. Shiu, and P. Soler, “On brane gaugino condensates in
10d,” JHEP 04 (2019) 008, arXiv:1812.06097 [hep-th].
[119] F. F. Gautason, V. Van Hemelryck, and T. Van Riet, “The Tension between 10D
Supergravity and dS Uplifts,” Fortsch. Phys. 67 no. 1-2, (2019) 1800091,
arXiv:1810.08518 [hep-th].
82

[120] F. Carta, J. Moritz, and A. Westphal, “Gaugino condensation and small uplifts in
KKLT,” JHEP 08 (2019) 141, arXiv:1902.01412 [hep-th].
[121] F. F. Gautason, V. Van Hemelryck, T. Van Riet, and G. Venken, “A 10d view on
the KKLT AdS vacuum and uplifting,” JHEP 06 (2020) 074, arXiv:1902.01415
[hep-th].
[122] Y. Hamada, A. Hebecker, G. Shiu, and P. Soler, “Understanding KKLT from a 10d
perspective,” JHEP 06 (2019) 019, arXiv:1902.01410 [hep-th].
[123] I. Bena, M. Graña, N. Kovensky, and A. Retolaza, “Kähler moduli stabilization
from ten dimensions,” JHEP 10 (2019) 200, arXiv:1908.01785 [hep-th].
[124] S. Kachru, M. Kim, L. McAllister, and M. Zimet, “de Sitter vacua from ten
dimensions,” JHEP 12 (2021) 111, arXiv:1908.04788 [hep-th].
[125] M. Graña, N. Kovensky, and D. Toulikas, “Smearing and unsmearing KKLT AdS
vacua,” JHEP 03 (2023) 015, arXiv:2212.05074 [hep-th].
[126] Y. Hamada, A. Hebecker, G. Shiu, and P. Soler, “Completing the D7-brane local
gaugino action,” JHEP 11 (2021) 033, arXiv:2105.11467 [hep-th].
[127] S. S. AbdusSalam, J. P. Conlon, F. Quevedo, and K. Suruliz, “Scanning the
Landscape of Flux Compactifications: Vacuum Structure and Soft Supersymmetry
Breaking,” JHEP 12 (2007) 036, arXiv:0709.0221 [hep-th].
[128] M. Berg, M. Haack, and B. Kors, “On volume stabilization by quantum
corrections,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 021601, arXiv:hep-th/0508171.
[129] V. Balasubramanian, P. Berglund, J. P. Conlon, and F. Quevedo, “Systematics of
moduli stabilisation in Calabi-Yau flux compactifications,” JHEP 03 (2005) 007,
arXiv:hep-th/0502058.
[130] J. P. Conlon and F. Quevedo, “Kahler moduli inflation,” JHEP 01 (2006) 146,
arXiv:hep-th/0509012.
[131] S. AbdusSalam, S. Abel, M. Cicoli, F. Quevedo, and P. Shukla, “A systematic
approach to Kähler moduli stabilisation,” JHEP 08 no. 08, (2020) 047,
arXiv:2005.11329 [hep-th].
[132] M. Cicoli, A. Schachner, and P. Shukla, “Systematics of type IIB moduli
stabilisation with odd axions,” JHEP 04 (2022) 003, arXiv:2109.14624 [hep-th].
[133] V. Balasubramanian and P. Berglund, “Stringy corrections to Kahler potentials,
SUSY breaking, and the cosmological constant problem,” JHEP 11 (2004) 085,
arXiv:hep-th/0408054.

83

[134] J. Louis, M. Rummel, R. Valandro, and A. Westphal, “Building an explicit de
Sitter,” JHEP 10 (2012) 163, arXiv:1208.3208 [hep-th].
[135] A. Chandra, A. Constantin, C. S. Fraser-Taliente, T. R. Harvey, and A. Lukas,
“Enumerating Calabi-Yau Manifolds: Placing bounds on the number of
diffeomorphism classes in the Kreuzer-Skarke list,” arXiv:2310.05909 [hep-th].
[136] N. Gendler, N. MacFadden, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, R. Nally, A. Schachner, and
M. Stillman, “Counting Calabi-Yau Threefolds,” arXiv:2310.06820 [hep-th].
[137] M. Cicoli, C. P. Burgess, and F. Quevedo, “Anisotropic Modulus Stabilisation:
Strings at LHC Scales with Micron-sized Extra Dimensions,” JHEP 10 (2011) 119,
arXiv:1105.2107 [hep-th].
[138] M. Cicoli, C. P. Burgess, and F. Quevedo, “Fibre Inflation: Observable Gravity
Waves from IIB String Compactifications,” JCAP 03 (2009) 013, arXiv:0808.0691
[hep-th].
[139] F. Rohsiepe, “Fibration structures in toric Calabi-Yau fourfolds,”
arXiv:hep-th/0502138.
[140] S. B. Johnson and W. Taylor, “Calabi-Yau threefolds with large h2,1 ,” JHEP 10
(2014) 023, arXiv:1406.0514 [hep-th].
[141] P. Candelas, A. Constantin, and H. Skarke, “An Abundance of K3 Fibrations from
Polyhedra with Interchangeable Parts,” Commun. Math. Phys. 324 (2013)
937–959, arXiv:1207.4792 [hep-th].
[142] J. Gray, A. S. Haupt, and A. Lukas, “Topological Invariants and Fibration
Structure of Complete Intersection Calabi-Yau Four-Folds,” JHEP 09 (2014) 093,
arXiv:1405.2073 [hep-th].
[143] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. D. Linde, J. M. Maldacena, L. P. McAllister, and S. P.
Trivedi, “Towards inflation in string theory,” JCAP 10 (2003) 013,
arXiv:hep-th/0308055.
[144] D. Junghans, “Dynamics of warped flux compactifications with backreacting
antibranes,” Phys. Rev. D 89 no. 12, (2014) 126007, arXiv:1402.4571 [hep-th].
[145] A. Schachner, “Progress in constructing KKLT de Sitter vacua.” Talk at String
Phenomenology 2023, Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon.
[146] O. DeWolfe, S. Kachru, and M. Mulligan, “A Gravity Dual of Metastable
Dynamical Supersymmetry Breaking,” Phys. Rev. D 77 (2008) 065011,
arXiv:0801.1520 [hep-th].

84

[147] P. McGuirk, G. Shiu, and Y. Sumitomo, “Non-supersymmetric infrared
perturbations to the warped deformed conifold,” Nucl. Phys. B 842 (2011)
383–413, arXiv:0910.4581 [hep-th].
[148] I. Bena, M. Grana, and N. Halmagyi, “On the Existence of Meta-stable Vacua in
Klebanov-Strassler,” JHEP 09 (2010) 087, arXiv:0912.3519 [hep-th].
[149] A. Dymarsky, “On gravity dual of a metastable vacuum in Klebanov-Strassler
theory,” JHEP 05 (2011) 053, arXiv:1102.1734 [hep-th].
[150] I. Bena, G. Giecold, M. Grana, N. Halmagyi, and S. Massai, “On Metastable Vacua
and the Warped Deformed Conifold: Analytic Results,” Class. Quant. Grav. 30
(2013) 015003, arXiv:1102.2403 [hep-th].
[151] I. Bena, G. Giecold, M. Grana, N. Halmagyi, and S. Massai, “The backreaction of
anti-D3 branes on the Klebanov-Strassler geometry,” JHEP 06 (2013) 060,
arXiv:1106.6165 [hep-th].
[152] J. Blaback, U. H. Danielsson, D. Junghans, T. Van Riet, T. Wrase, and
M. Zagermann, “(Anti-)Brane backreaction beyond perturbation theory,” JHEP 02
(2012) 025, arXiv:1111.2605 [hep-th].
[153] F. F. Gautason, D. Junghans, and M. Zagermann, “Cosmological Constant, Near
Brane Behavior and Singularities,” JHEP 09 (2013) 123, arXiv:1301.5647
[hep-th].
[154] B. Michel, E. Mintun, J. Polchinski, A. Puhm, and P. Saad, “Remarks on brane
and antibrane dynamics,” JHEP 09 (2015) 021, arXiv:1412.5702 [hep-th].
[155] J. Polchinski, “Brane/antibrane dynamics and KKLT stability,”
arXiv:1509.05710 [hep-th].
[156] D. Cohen-Maldonado, J. Diaz, T. Van Riet, and B. Vercnocke, “From black holes
to flux throats: Polarization can resolve the singularity,” Fortsch. Phys. 64 (2016)
317–321, arXiv:1511.07453 [hep-th].
[157] D. Cohen-Maldonado, J. Diaz, and F. F. Gautason, “Polarised antibranes from
Smarr relations,” JHEP 05 (2016) 175, arXiv:1603.05678 [hep-th].
[158] G. S. Hartnett, “Localised Anti-Branes in Flux Backgrounds,” JHEP 06 (2015)
007, arXiv:1501.06568 [hep-th].
[159] J. Armas, N. Nguyen, V. Niarchos, N. A. Obers, and T. Van Riet, “Meta-stable
non-extremal anti-branes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 no. 18, (2019) 181601,
arXiv:1812.01067 [hep-th].

85

[160] J. Blåbäck, F. F. Gautason, A. Ruipérez, and T. Van Riet, “Anti-brane
singularities as red herrings,” JHEP 12 (2019) 125, arXiv:1907.05295 [hep-th].
[161] N. Nguyen, “Comments on the stability of the KPV state,” JHEP 11 (2020) 055,
arXiv:1912.04646 [hep-th].
[162] N. Nguyen and V. Niarchos, “On matched asymptotic expansions of backreacting
metastable anti-branes,” JHEP 06 (2022) 055, arXiv:2112.04514 [hep-th].
[163] X. Gao, A. Hebecker, and D. Junghans, “Control issues of KKLT,” Fortsch. Phys.
68 (2020) 2000089, arXiv:2009.03914 [hep-th].
[164] F. Carta and J. Moritz, “Resolving spacetime singularities in flux compactifications
& KKLT,” JHEP 08 (2021) 093, arXiv:2101.05281 [hep-th].
[165] S. Ferrara, R. Kallosh, and A. Linde, “Cosmology with Nilpotent Superfields,”
JHEP 10 (2014) 143, arXiv:1408.4096 [hep-th].
[166] R. Kallosh and T. Wrase, “Emergence of Spontaneously Broken Supersymmetry on
an Anti-D3-Brane in KKLT dS Vacua,” JHEP 12 (2014) 117, arXiv:1411.1121
[hep-th].
[167] E. A. Bergshoeff, K. Dasgupta, R. Kallosh, A. Van Proeyen, and T. Wrase, “D3
and dS,” JHEP 05 (2015) 058, arXiv:1502.07627 [hep-th].
[168] R. Kallosh, F. Quevedo, and A. M. Uranga, “String Theory Realizations of the
Nilpotent Goldstino,” JHEP 12 (2015) 039, arXiv:1507.07556 [hep-th].
[169] I. Garcia-Etxebarria, F. Quevedo, and R. Valandro, “Global String Embeddings for
the Nilpotent Goldstino,” JHEP 02 (2016) 148, arXiv:1512.06926 [hep-th].
[170] L. Aparicio, F. Quevedo, and R. Valandro, “Moduli Stabilisation with Nilpotent
Goldstino: Vacuum Structure and SUSY Breaking,” JHEP 03 (2016) 036,
arXiv:1511.08105 [hep-th].
[171] I. Antoniadis, E. Dudas, S. Ferrara, and A. Sagnotti, “The
Volkov–Akulov–Starobinsky supergravity,” Phys. Lett. B 733 (2014) 32–35,
arXiv:1403.3269 [hep-th].
[172] E. Dudas, S. Ferrara, A. Kehagias, and A. Sagnotti, “Properties of Nilpotent
Supergravity,” JHEP 09 (2015) 217, arXiv:1507.07842 [hep-th].
[173] M. P. Garcia del Moral, S. Parameswaran, N. Quiroz, and I. Zavala, “Anti-D3
branes and moduli in non-linear supergravity,” JHEP 10 (2017) 185,
arXiv:1707.07059 [hep-th].

86

[174] N. Cribiori, C. Roupec, T. Wrase, and Y. Yamada, “Supersymmetric anti-D3-brane
action in the Kachru-Kallosh-Linde-Trivedi setup,” Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 6, (2019)
066001, arXiv:1906.07727 [hep-th].
[175] S. P. de Alwis, “Radiative Generation of dS from AdS,” arXiv:2110.06967
[hep-th].
[176] A. Westphal, “de Sitter string vacua from Kahler uplifting,” JHEP 03 (2007) 102,
arXiv:hep-th/0611332.
[177] M. Rummel and A. Westphal, “A sufficient condition for de Sitter vacua in type
IIB string theory,” JHEP 01 (2012) 020, arXiv:1107.2115 [hep-th].
[178] K. Choi, A. Falkowski, H. P. Nilles, and M. Olechowski, “Soft supersymmetry
breaking in KKLT flux compactification,” Nucl. Phys. B 718 (2005) 113–133,
arXiv:hep-th/0503216.
[179] G. Villadoro and F. Zwirner, “De-Sitter vacua via consistent D-terms,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 95 (2005) 231602, arXiv:hep-th/0508167.
[180] R. Blumenhagen, S. Moster, and E. Plauschinn, “Moduli Stabilisation versus
Chirality for MSSM like Type IIB Orientifolds,” JHEP 01 (2008) 058,
arXiv:0711.3389 [hep-th].
[181] S. L. Parameswaran and A. Westphal, “Consistent de Sitter string vacua from
Kahler stabilization and D-term uplifting,” Fortsch. Phys. 55 (2007) 804–810,
arXiv:hep-th/0701215.
[182] A. P. Braun, M. Rummel, Y. Sumitomo, and R. Valandro, “De Sitter vacua from a
D-term generated racetrack potential in hypersurface Calabi-Yau
compactifications,” JHEP 12 (2015) 033, arXiv:1509.06918 [hep-th].
[183] M. Cicoli, F. Quevedo, and R. Valandro, “De Sitter from T-branes,” JHEP 03
(2016) 141, arXiv:1512.04558 [hep-th].
[184] R. Donagi, S. Katz, and E. Sharpe, “Spectra of D-branes with higgs vevs,” Adv.
Theor. Math. Phys. 8 no. 5, (2004) 813–859, arXiv:hep-th/0309270.
[185] S. Cecotti, C. Cordova, J. J. Heckman, and C. Vafa, “T-Branes and Monodromy,”
JHEP 07 (2011) 030, arXiv:1010.5780 [hep-th].
[186] R. Donagi and M. Wijnholt, “Gluing Branes, I,” JHEP 05 (2013) 068,
arXiv:1104.2610 [hep-th].
[187] A. Saltman and E. Silverstein, “The Scaling of the no scale potential and de Sitter
model building,” JHEP 11 (2004) 066, arXiv:hep-th/0402135.

87

[188] D. Gallego, M. C. D. Marsh, B. Vercnocke, and T. Wrase, “A New Class of de
Sitter Vacua in Type IIB Large Volume Compactifications,” JHEP 10 (2017) 193,
arXiv:1707.01095 [hep-th].
[189] S. Krippendorf and A. Schachner, “New non-supersymmetric flux vacua in string
theory,” arXiv:2308.15525 [hep-th].
[190] M. Demirtas, N. Gendler, L. McAllister, J. Moritz, R. Nally, and A. Rios-Tascon.
Unpublished.
[191] U. H. Danielsson and T. Van Riet, “What if string theory has no de Sitter vacua?,”
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 27 no. 12, (2018) 1830007, arXiv:1804.01120 [hep-th].
[192] G. Obied, H. Ooguri, L. Spodyneiko, and C. Vafa, “De Sitter Space and the
Swampland,” arXiv:1806.08362 [hep-th].
[193] M. Cicoli, S. De Alwis, A. Maharana, F. Muia, and F. Quevedo, “De Sitter vs
Quintessence in String Theory,” Fortsch. Phys. 67 no. 1-2, (2019) 1800079,
arXiv:1808.08967 [hep-th].
[194] S. Kachru and S. P. Trivedi, “A comment on effective field theories of flux vacua,”
Fortsch. Phys. 67 no. 1-2, (2019) 1800086, arXiv:1808.08971 [hep-th].
[195] R. Kallosh, A. Linde, E. McDonough, and M. Scalisi, “dS Vacua and the
Swampland,” JHEP 03 (2019) 134, arXiv:1901.02022 [hep-th].
[196] I. Bena, E. Dudas, M. Graña, G. Lo Monaco, and D. Toulikas, “Anti D3-branes
and gaugino condensation,” arXiv:2211.14381 [hep-th].
[197] M. Graña, T. W. Grimm, D. van de Heisteeg, A. Herraez, and E. Plauschinn, “The
tadpole conjecture in asymptotic limits,” JHEP 08 (2022) 237, arXiv:2204.05331
[hep-th].
[198] I. Bena, J. Blåbäck, M. Graña, and S. Lüst, “Algorithmically Solving the Tadpole
Problem,” Adv. Appl. Clifford Algebras 32 no. 1, (2022) 7, arXiv:2103.03250
[hep-th].
[199] I. Bena, J. Blåbäck, M. Graña, and S. Lüst, “The tadpole problem,” JHEP 11
(2021) 223, arXiv:2010.10519 [hep-th].
[200] M. Graña, N. Kovensky, and A. Retolaza, “Gaugino mass term for D-branes and
Generalized Complex Geometry,” JHEP 06 (2020) 047, arXiv:2002.01481
[hep-th].
[201] C. Crinò, F. Quevedo, and R. Valandro, “On de Sitter String Vacua from
Anti-D3-Branes in the Large Volume Scenario,” JHEP 03 (2021) 258,
arXiv:2010.15903 [hep-th].
88

[202] C. Crinò, F. Quevedo, A. Schachner, and R. Valandro, “A database of Calabi-Yau
orientifolds and the size of D3-tadpoles,” JHEP 08 (2022) 050, arXiv:2204.13115
[hep-th].
[203] D. Junghans, “Topological constraints in the LARGE-volume scenario,” JHEP 08
(2022) 226, arXiv:2205.02856 [hep-th].
[204] D. Junghans, “LVS de Sitter vacua are probably in the swampland,” Nucl. Phys. B
990 (2023) 116179, arXiv:2201.03572 [hep-th].
[205] J. Blåbäck, U. H. Danielsson, D. Junghans, T. Van Riet, and S. C. Vargas,
“Localised anti-branes in non-compact throats at zero and finite T ,” JHEP 02
(2015) 018, arXiv:1409.0534 [hep-th].
[206] D. Junghans, D. Schmidt, and M. Zagermann, “Curvature-induced Resolution of
Anti-brane Singularities,” JHEP 10 (2014) 034, arXiv:1402.6040 [hep-th].
[207] R. Blumenhagen, D. Herschmann, and F. Wolf, “String Moduli Stabilization at the
Conifold,” JHEP 08 (2016) 110, arXiv:1605.06299 [hep-th].
[208] S. Lüst and L. Randall, “Effective Theory of Warped Compactifications and the
Implications for KKLT,” Fortsch. Phys. 70 no. 7-8, (2022) 2200103,
arXiv:2206.04708 [hep-th].
[209] S. Lüst, C. Vafa, M. Wiesner, and K. Xu, “Holography and the KKLT scenario,”
JHEP 10 (2022) 188, arXiv:2204.07171 [hep-th].
[210] B. Valeixo Bento, D. Chakraborty, S. Parameswaran, and I. Zavala, “De Sitter
vacua – when are ‘subleading corrections’ really subleading?,” arXiv:2306.07332
[hep-th].
[211] B. V. Bento, D. Chakraborty, S. L. Parameswaran, and I. Zavala, “A new de Sitter
solution with a weakly warped deformed conifold,” JHEP 12 (2021) 124,
arXiv:2105.03370 [hep-th].
[212] M. Cicoli, M. Licheri, P. Piantadosi, F. Quevedo, and P. Shukla, “Higher Derivative
Corrections to String Inflation,” arXiv:2309.11697 [hep-th].
[213] D. Junghans, “de Sitter-eating O-planes in supercritical string theory,”
arXiv:2308.00026 [hep-th].
[214] F. Marchesano, B. Schellekens, and T. Weigand, “D-brane and F-theory Model
Building,” arXiv:2212.07443 [hep-th].
[215] J. Halverson and P. Langacker, “TASI Lectures on Remnants from the String
Landscape,” PoS TASI2017 (2018) 019, arXiv:1801.03503 [hep-th].

89

[216] M. Cicoli, C. Mayrhofer, and R. Valandro, “Moduli Stabilisation for Chiral Global
Models,” JHEP 02 (2012) 062, arXiv:1110.3333 [hep-th].
[217] M. Cicoli, S. Krippendorf, C. Mayrhofer, F. Quevedo, and R. Valandro, “D-Branes
at del Pezzo Singularities: Global Embedding and Moduli Stabilisation,” JHEP 09
(2012) 019, arXiv:1206.5237 [hep-th].
[218] M. Cicoli, D. Klevers, S. Krippendorf, C. Mayrhofer, F. Quevedo, and R. Valandro,
“Explicit de Sitter Flux Vacua for Global String Models with Chiral Matter,”
JHEP 05 (2014) 001, arXiv:1312.0014 [hep-th].
[219] M. Cicoli, I. Garcia-Etxebarria, C. Mayrhofer, F. Quevedo, P. Shukla, and
R. Valandro, “Global Orientifolded Quivers with Inflation,” JHEP 11 (2017) 134,
arXiv:1706.06128 [hep-th].
[220] M. Cicoli, I. Garcia-Etxebarria, F. Quevedo, A. Schachner, P. Shukla, and
R. Valandro, “The Standard Model quiver in de Sitter string compactifications,”
JHEP 08 (2021) 109, arXiv:2106.11964 [hep-th].
[221] G. Aldazabal, L. E. Ibanez, F. Quevedo, and A. M. Uranga, “D-branes at
singularities: A Bottom up approach to the string embedding of the standard
model,” JHEP 08 (2000) 002, arXiv:hep-th/0005067.
[222] J. P. Conlon, A. Maharana, and F. Quevedo, “Towards Realistic String Vacua,”
JHEP 05 (2009) 109, arXiv:0810.5660 [hep-th].
[223] R. Donagi and M. Wijnholt, “Model Building with F-Theory,” Adv. Theor. Math.
Phys. 15 no. 5, (2011) 1237–1317, arXiv:0802.2969 [hep-th].
[224] C. Beasley, J. J. Heckman, and C. Vafa, “GUTs and Exceptional Branes in
F-theory - I,” JHEP 01 (2009) 058, arXiv:0802.3391 [hep-th].
[225] V. S. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis, “Model independent analysis of soft terms in
effective supergravity and in string theory,” Phys. Lett. B 306 (1993) 269–275,
arXiv:hep-th/9303040.
[226] A. Brignole, L. E. Ibanez, and C. Munoz, “Towards a theory of soft terms for the
supersymmetric Standard Model,” Nucl. Phys. B 422 (1994) 125–171,
arXiv:hep-ph/9308271. [Erratum: Nucl.Phys.B 436, 747–748 (1995)].
[227] J. P. Conlon, F. Quevedo, and K. Suruliz, “Large-volume flux compactifications:
Moduli spectrum and D3/D7 soft supersymmetry breaking,” JHEP 08 (2005) 007,
arXiv:hep-th/0505076.
[228] J. P. Conlon, S. S. Abdussalam, F. Quevedo, and K. Suruliz, “Soft SUSY Breaking
Terms for Chiral Matter in IIB String Compactifications,” JHEP 01 (2007) 032,
arXiv:hep-th/0610129.
90

[229] R. Blumenhagen, J. P. Conlon, S. Krippendorf, S. Moster, and F. Quevedo, “SUSY
Breaking in Local String/F-Theory Models,” JHEP 09 (2009) 007,
arXiv:0906.3297 [hep-th].
[230] L. Aparicio, M. Cicoli, S. Krippendorf, A. Maharana, F. Muia, and F. Quevedo,
“Sequestered de Sitter String Scenarios: Soft-terms,” JHEP 11 (2014) 071,
arXiv:1409.1931 [hep-th].
[231] M. Cicoli, A. Cotellucci, and H. Otsuka, “Sequestered String Models imply Split
Supersymmetry,” arXiv:2309.05752 [hep-th].
[232] M. Berg, D. Marsh, L. McAllister, and E. Pajer, “Sequestering in String
Compactifications,” JHEP 06 (2011) 134, arXiv:1012.1858 [hep-th].
[233] J. P. Conlon and L. T. Witkowski, “Scattering and Sequestering of Blow-Up Moduli
in Local String Models,” JHEP 12 (2011) 028, arXiv:1109.4153 [hep-th].
[234] M. Berg, J. P. Conlon, D. Marsh, and L. T. Witkowski, “Superpotential
de-sequestering in string models,” JHEP 02 (2013) 018, arXiv:1207.1103
[hep-th].
[235] O. DeWolfe, A. Giryavets, S. Kachru, and W. Taylor, “Type IIA moduli
stabilization,” JHEP 07 (2005) 066, arXiv:hep-th/0505160.
[236] F. Marchesano and J. Quirant, “A Landscape of AdS Flux Vacua,” JHEP 12
(2019) 110, arXiv:1908.11386 [hep-th].
[237] D. Junghans, “O-Plane Backreaction and Scale Separation in Type IIA Flux
Vacua,” Fortsch. Phys. 68 no. 6, (2020) 2000040, arXiv:2003.06274 [hep-th].
[238] F. Marchesano, E. Palti, J. Quirant, and A. Tomasiello, “On supersymmetric AdS4
orientifold vacua,” JHEP 08 (2020) 087, arXiv:2003.13578 [hep-th].
[239] F. Apers, J. P. Conlon, S. Ning, and F. Revello, “Integer conformal dimensions for
type IIa flux vacua,” Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 10, (2022) 106029, arXiv:2202.09330
[hep-th].
[240] F. Apers, M. Montero, T. Van Riet, and T. Wrase, “Comments on classical AdS
flux vacua with scale separation,” JHEP 05 (2022) 167, arXiv:2202.00682
[hep-th].
[241] F. Apers, “Aspects of AdS flux vacua with integer conformal dimensions,” JHEP
05 (2023) 040, arXiv:2211.04187 [hep-th].
[242] J. Quirant, “Noninteger conformal dimensions for type IIA flux vacua,” Phys. Rev.
D 106 no. 6, (2022) 066017, arXiv:2204.00014 [hep-th].

91

[243] D. Andriot and G. Tringas, “Extensions of a scale separated AdS4 solution and
their mass spectrum,” arXiv:2310.06115 [hep-th].
[244] E. Plauschinn, “Mass spectrum of type IIB flux compactifications — comments on
AdS vacua and conformal dimensions,” JHEP 02 (2023) 257, arXiv:2210.04528
[hep-th].
[245] N. Cribiori, D. Junghans, V. Van Hemelryck, T. Van Riet, and T. Wrase,
“Scale-separated AdS4 vacua of IIA orientifolds and M-theory,” Phys. Rev. D 104
no. 12, (2021) 126014, arXiv:2107.00019 [hep-th].
[246] C. Córdova, G. B. De Luca, and A. Tomasiello, “Classical de Sitter Solutions of
10-Dimensional Supergravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 no. 9, (2019) 091601,
arXiv:1812.04147 [hep-th].
[247] C. Córdova, G. B. De Luca, and A. Tomasiello, “New de Sitter Solutions in Ten
Dimensions and Orientifold Singularities,” JHEP 08 (2020) 093,
arXiv:1911.04498 [hep-th].
[248] N. Cribiori and D. Junghans, “No classical (anti-)de Sitter solutions with
O8-planes,” Phys. Lett. B 793 (2019) 54–58, arXiv:1902.08209 [hep-th].
[249] J. P. Derendinger, L. E. Ibanez, and H. P. Nilles, “On the Low-Energy d = 4, N=1
Supergravity Theory Extracted from the d = 10, N=1 Superstring,” Phys. Lett. B
155 (1985) 65–70.
[250] M. Dine, R. Rohm, N. Seiberg, and E. Witten, “Gluino Condensation in
Superstring Models,” Phys. Lett. B 156 (1985) 55–60.
[251] M. Cicoli, S. de Alwis, and A. Westphal, “Heterotic Moduli Stabilisation,” JHEP
10 (2013) 199, arXiv:1304.1809 [hep-th].
[252] N. V. Krasnikov, “On Supersymmetry Breaking in Superstring Theories,” Phys.
Lett. B 193 (1987) 37–40.
[253] L. J. Dixon, “Supersymmetry Breaking in String Theory,” in 15th APS Division of
Particles and Fields General Meeting, pp. 811–822. 4, 1990.
[254] J. A. Casas, Z. Lalak, C. Munoz, and G. G. Ross, “Hierarchical Supersymmetry
Breaking and Dynamical Determination of Compactification Parameters by
Nonperturbative Effects,” Nucl. Phys. B 347 (1990) 243–269.
[255] S. Ferrara, D. Lust, and S. Theisen, “Target Space Modular Invariance and
Low-Energy Couplings in Orbifold Compactifications,” Phys. Lett. B 233 (1989)
147–152.

92

[256] A. Font, L. E. Ibanez, D. Lust, and F. Quevedo, “Supersymmetry Breaking From
Duality Invariant Gaugino Condensation,” Phys. Lett. B 245 (1990) 401–408.
[257] S. Ferrara, N. Magnoli, T. R. Taylor, and G. Veneziano, “Duality and
supersymmetry breaking in string theory,” Phys. Lett. B 245 (1990) 409–416.
[258] L. J. Dixon, V. Kaplunovsky, and J. Louis, “Moduli dependence of string loop
corrections to gauge coupling constants,” Nucl. Phys. B 355 (1991) 649–688.
[259] M. Cvetic, A. Font, L. E. Ibanez, D. Lust, and F. Quevedo, “Target space duality,
supersymmetry breaking and the stability of classical string vacua,” Nucl. Phys. B
361 (1991) 194–232.
[260] S. L. Parameswaran, S. Ramos-Sanchez, and I. Zavala, “On Moduli Stabilisation
and de Sitter Vacua in MSSM Heterotic Orbifolds,” JHEP 01 (2011) 071,
arXiv:1009.3931 [hep-th].
[261] J. M. Leedom, N. Righi, and A. Westphal, “Heterotic de Sitter beyond modular
symmetry,” JHEP 02 (2023) 209, arXiv:2212.03876 [hep-th].
[262] V. Knapp-Perez, X.-G. Liu, H. P. Nilles, S. Ramos-Sanchez, and M. Ratz, “Matter
matters in moduli fixing and modular flavor symmetries,” arXiv:2304.14437
[hep-th].
[263] B. de Carlos, S. Gurrieri, A. Lukas, and A. Micu, “Moduli stabilisation in heterotic
string compactifications,” JHEP 03 (2006) 005, arXiv:hep-th/0507173.
[264] L. B. Anderson, J. Gray, A. Lukas, and B. Ovrut, “Stabilizing All Geometric
Moduli in Heterotic Calabi-Yau Vacua,” Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 106011,
arXiv:1102.0011 [hep-th].
[265] M. Klaput, A. Lukas, C. Matti, and E. E. Svanes, “Moduli Stabilising in Heterotic
Nearly Kähler Compactifications,” JHEP 01 (2013) 015, arXiv:1210.5933
[hep-th].
[266] E. I. Buchbinder, A. Constantin, and A. Lukas, “The Moduli Space of Heterotic
Line Bundle Models: a Case Study for the Tetra-Quadric,” JHEP 03 (2014) 025,
arXiv:1311.1941 [hep-th].
[267] S. Gukov, S. Kachru, X. Liu, and L. McAllister, “Heterotic moduli stabilization
with fractional Chern-Simons invariants,” Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 086008,
arXiv:hep-th/0310159.
[268] F. Apruzzi, F. F. Gautason, S. Parameswaran, and M. Zagermann, “Wilson lines
and Chern-Simons flux in explicit heterotic Calabi-Yau compactifications,” JHEP
02 (2015) 183, arXiv:1410.2603 [hep-th].
93

[269] L. B. Anderson, J. Gray, A. Lukas, and J. Wang, “Chern-Simons invariants and
heterotic superpotentials,” JHEP 09 (2020) 141, arXiv:2006.03082 [hep-th].
[270] I. Antoniadis and T. Maillard, “Moduli stabilization from magnetic fluxes in type I
string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 716 (2005) 3–32, arXiv:hep-th/0412008.
[271] I. Antoniadis, A. Kumar, and T. Maillard, “Moduli stabilization with open and
closed string fluxes,” arXiv:hep-th/0505260.
[272] M. Bianchi and E. Kiritsis, “Non-perturbative and Flux superpotentials for Type I
strings on the Z(3) orbifold,” Nucl. Phys. B 782 (2007) 26–50,
arXiv:hep-th/0702015.
[273] M. J. Duff, “M theory on manifolds of G(2) holonomy: The First twenty years,” in
Supergravity at 25. 1, 2002. arXiv:hep-th/0201062.
[274] B. S. Acharya, F. Denef, and R. Valandro, “Statistics of M theory vacua,” JHEP
06 (2005) 056, arXiv:hep-th/0502060.
[275] C. Beasley and E. Witten, “A Note on fluxes and superpotentials in M theory
compactifications on manifolds of G(2) holonomy,” JHEP 07 (2002) 046,
arXiv:hep-th/0203061.
[276] S. Gukov, “Solitons, superpotentials and calibrations,” Nucl. Phys. B 574 (2000)
169–188, arXiv:hep-th/9911011.
[277] A. P. Braun, M. Del Zotto, J. Halverson, M. Larfors, D. R. Morrison, and
S. Schäfer-Nameki, “Infinitely many M2-instanton corrections to M-theory on
G2 -manifolds,” JHEP 09 (2018) 077, arXiv:1803.02343 [hep-th].
[278] B. S. Acharya, K. Bobkov, G. L. Kane, P. Kumar, and J. Shao, “Explaining the
Electroweak Scale and Stabilizing Moduli in M Theory,” Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007)
126010, arXiv:hep-th/0701034.
[279] B. S. Acharya, G. Kane, and P. Kumar, “Compactified String Theories – Generic
Predictions for Particle Physics,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 27 (2012) 1230012,
arXiv:1204.2795 [hep-ph].
[280] D. Joyce, Compact Manifolds with Special Holonomy. Oxford University Press,
2000.
[281] M. Atiyah and E. Witten, “M theory dynamics on a manifold of G(2) holonomy,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 6 (2003) 1–106, arXiv:hep-th/0107177.
[282] B. S. Acharya and E. Witten, “Chiral fermions from manifolds of G(2) holonomy,”
arXiv:hep-th/0109152.

94

[283] J. Halverson and D. R. Morrison, “The landscape of M-theory compactifications on
seven-manifolds with G2 holonomy,” JHEP 04 (2015) 047, arXiv:1412.4123
[hep-th].
[284] J. Halverson and D. R. Morrison, “On gauge enhancement and singular limits in G2
compactifications of M-theory,” JHEP 04 (2016) 100, arXiv:1507.05965
[hep-th].
[285] A. P. Braun, “Tops as building blocks for G2 manifolds,” JHEP 10 (2017) 083,
arXiv:1602.03521 [hep-th].
[286] E. Silverstein, “TASI / PiTP / ISS lectures on moduli and microphysics,” in
Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics (TASI 2003):
Recent Trends in String Theory, pp. 381–415. 5, 2004. arXiv:hep-th/0405068.
[287] E. Silverstein, “(A)dS backgrounds from asymmetric orientifolds,” Clay Mat. Proc.
1 (2002) 179, arXiv:hep-th/0106209.
[288] A. Maloney, E. Silverstein, and A. Strominger, “De Sitter space in noncritical
string theory,” in Workshop on Conference on the Future of Theoretical Physics
and Cosmology in Honor of Stephen Hawking’s 60th Birthday, pp. 570–591. 5,
2002. arXiv:hep-th/0205316.
[289] G. B. De Luca, E. Silverstein, and G. Torroba, “Hyperbolic compactification of
M-theory and de Sitter quantum gravity,” SciPost Phys. 12 no. 3, (2022) 083,
arXiv:2104.13380 [hep-th].
[290] E. Silverstein, “Simple de Sitter Solutions,” Phys. Rev. D 77 (2008) 106006,
arXiv:0712.1196 [hep-th].
[291] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis, and C. Vafa, “The String landscape, black
holes and gravity as the weakest force,” JHEP 06 (2007) 060,
arXiv:hep-th/0601001.
[292] E. Palti, “The Swampland: Introduction and Review,” Fortsch. Phys. 67 no. 6,
(2019) 1900037, arXiv:1903.06239 [hep-th].
[293] M. van Beest, J. Calderón-Infante, D. Mirfendereski, and I. Valenzuela, “Lectures
on the Swampland Program in String Compactifications,” Phys. Rept. 989 (2022)
1–50, arXiv:2102.01111 [hep-th].
[294] N. B. Agmon, A. Bedroya, M. J. Kang, and C. Vafa, “Lectures on the string
landscape and the Swampland,” arXiv:2212.06187 [hep-th].
[295] D. Harlow, B. Heidenreich, M. Reece, and T. Rudelius, “Weak gravity conjecture,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 95 no. 3, (2023) 035003, arXiv:2201.08380 [hep-th].
95

[296] P. Binétruy and M. K. Gaillard, “Candidates for the Inflaton Field in Superstring
Models,” Phys. Rev. D 34 (1986) 3069–3083.
[297] T. Banks, M. Berkooz, S. H. Shenker, G. W. Moore, and P. J. Steinhardt,
“Modular cosmology,” Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995) 3548–3562, arXiv:hep-th/9503114.
[298] G. R. Dvali and S. H. H. Tye, “Brane inflation,” Phys. Lett. B 450 (1999) 72–82,
arXiv:hep-ph/9812483.
[299] C. P. Burgess, M. Majumdar, D. Nolte, F. Quevedo, G. Rajesh, and R.-J. Zhang,
“The Inflationary brane anti-brane universe,” JHEP 07 (2001) 047,
arXiv:hep-th/0105204.
[300] G. R. Dvali, Q. Shafi, and S. Solganik, “D-brane inflation,” in 4th European Meeting
From the Planck Scale to the Electroweak Scale. 5, 2001. arXiv:hep-th/0105203.
[301] S. H. S. Alexander, “Inflation from D - anti-D-brane annihilation,” Phys. Rev. D 65
(2002) 023507, arXiv:hep-th/0105032.
[302] S. Sarangi and S. H. H. Tye, “Cosmic string production towards the end of brane
inflation,” Phys. Lett. B 536 (2002) 185–192, arXiv:hep-th/0204074.
[303] E. J. Copeland, R. C. Myers, and J. Polchinski, “Cosmic F and D strings,” JHEP
06 (2004) 013, arXiv:hep-th/0312067.
[304] D. Baumann, A. Dymarsky, I. R. Klebanov, and L. McAllister, “Towards an
Explicit Model of D-brane Inflation,” JCAP 01 (2008) 024, arXiv:0706.0360
[hep-th].
[305] D. Baumann, A. Dymarsky, S. Kachru, I. R. Klebanov, and L. McAllister,
“Holographic Systematics of D-brane Inflation,” JHEP 03 (2009) 093,
arXiv:0808.2811 [hep-th].
[306] N. Agarwal, R. Bean, L. McAllister, and G. Xu, “Universality in D-brane
Inflation,” JCAP 09 (2011) 002, arXiv:1103.2775 [astro-ph.CO].
[307] L. McAllister, S. Renaux-Petel, and G. Xu, “A Statistical Approach to Multifield
Inflation: Many-field Perturbations Beyond Slow Roll,” JCAP 10 (2012) 046,
arXiv:1207.0317 [astro-ph.CO].
[308] C. P. Burgess, M. Cicoli, F. Quevedo, and M. Williams, “Inflating with Large
Effective Fields,” JCAP 11 (2014) 045, arXiv:1404.6236 [hep-th].
[309] C. P. Burgess, M. Cicoli, S. de Alwis, and F. Quevedo, “Robust Inflation from
Fibrous Strings,” JCAP 05 (2016) 032, arXiv:1603.06789 [hep-th].
[310] K. Freese, J. A. Frieman, and A. V. Olinto, “Natural inflation with pseudo Nambu-Goldstone bosons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990) 3233–3236.
96

[311] T. Banks, M. Dine, P. J. Fox, and E. Gorbatov, “On the possibility of large axion
decay constants,” JCAP 06 (2003) 001, arXiv:hep-th/0303252.
[312] T. C. Bachlechner, C. Long, and L. McAllister, “Planckian Axions in String
Theory,” JHEP 12 (2015) 042, arXiv:1412.1093 [hep-th].
[313] J. P. Conlon and S. Krippendorf, “Axion decay constants away from the lamppost,”
JHEP 04 (2016) 085, arXiv:1601.00647 [hep-th].
[314] J. E. Kim, H. P. Nilles, and M. Peloso, “Completing natural inflation,” JCAP 01
(2005) 005, arXiv:hep-ph/0409138.
[315] S. Dimopoulos, S. Kachru, J. McGreevy, and J. G. Wacker, “N-flation,” JCAP 08
(2008) 003, arXiv:hep-th/0507205.
[316] R. Easther and L. McAllister, “Random matrices and the spectrum of N-flation,”
JCAP 05 (2006) 018, arXiv:hep-th/0512102.
[317] T. W. Grimm, “Axion inflation in type II string theory,” Phys. Rev. D 77 (2008)
126007, arXiv:0710.3883 [hep-th].
[318] T. W. Grimm, “Axion Inflation in F-theory,” Phys. Lett. B 739 (2014) 201–208,
arXiv:1404.4268 [hep-th].
[319] E. Silverstein and A. Westphal, “Monodromy in the CMB: Gravity Waves and
String Inflation,” Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 106003, arXiv:0803.3085 [hep-th].
[320] R. Flauger, L. McAllister, E. Pajer, A. Westphal, and G. Xu, “Oscillations in the
CMB from Axion Monodromy Inflation,” JCAP 06 (2010) 009, arXiv:0907.2916
[hep-th].
[321] L. E. Ibanez, F. Marchesano, and I. Valenzuela, “Higgs-otic Inflation and String
Theory,” JHEP 01 (2015) 128, arXiv:1411.5380 [hep-th].
[322] L. McAllister, P. Schwaller, G. Servant, J. Stout, and A. Westphal, “Runaway
Relaxion Monodromy,” JHEP 02 (2018) 124, arXiv:1610.05320 [hep-th].
[323] M. Kim and L. McAllister, “Monodromy Charge in D7-brane Inflation,” JHEP 10
(2020) 060, arXiv:1812.03532 [hep-th].
[324] F. Marchesano, G. Shiu, and A. M. Uranga, “F-term Axion Monodromy Inflation,”
JHEP 09 (2014) 184, arXiv:1404.3040 [hep-th].
[325] A. Hebecker, P. Mangat, F. Rompineve, and L. T. Witkowski, “Tuning and
Backreaction in F-term Axion Monodromy Inflation,” Nucl. Phys. B 894 (2015)
456–495, arXiv:1411.2032 [hep-th].

97

[326] R. Blumenhagen and E. Plauschinn, “Towards Universal Axion Inflation and
Reheating in String Theory,” Phys. Lett. B 736 (2014) 482–487, arXiv:1404.3542
[hep-th].
[327] A. Hebecker, S. C. Kraus, and L. T. Witkowski, “D7-Brane Chaotic Inflation,”
Phys. Lett. B 737 (2014) 16–22, arXiv:1404.3711 [hep-th].
[328] M. Arends, A. Hebecker, K. Heimpel, S. C. Kraus, D. Lust, C. Mayrhofer,
C. Schick, and T. Weigand, “D7-Brane Moduli Space in Axion Monodromy and
Fluxbrane Inflation,” Fortsch. Phys. 62 (2014) 647–702, arXiv:1405.0283
[hep-th].
[329] R. Blumenhagen, D. Herschmann, and E. Plauschinn, “The Challenge of Realizing
F-term Axion Monodromy Inflation in String Theory,” JHEP 01 (2015) 007,
arXiv:1409.7075 [hep-th].
[330] L. McAllister, E. Silverstein, A. Westphal, and T. Wrase, “The Powers of
Monodromy,” JHEP 09 (2014) 123, arXiv:1405.3652 [hep-th].
[331] A. Hebecker, P. Mangat, F. Rompineve, and L. T. Witkowski, “Winding out of the
Swamp: Evading the Weak Gravity Conjecture with F-term Winding Inflation?,”
Phys. Lett. B 748 (2015) 455–462, arXiv:1503.07912 [hep-th].
[332] G. D. Coughlan, W. Fischler, E. W. Kolb, S. Raby, and G. G. Ross, “Cosmological
Problems for the Polonyi Potential,” Phys. Lett. B 131 (1983) 59–64.
[333] T. Banks, D. B. Kaplan, and A. E. Nelson, “Cosmological implications of
dynamical supersymmetry breaking,” Phys. Rev. D 49 (1994) 779–787,
arXiv:hep-ph/9308292.
[334] B. de Carlos, J. A. Casas, F. Quevedo, and E. Roulet, “Model independent
properties and cosmological implications of the dilaton and moduli sectors of 4-d
strings,” Phys. Lett. B 318 (1993) 447–456, arXiv:hep-ph/9308325.
[335] R. Brustein and P. J. Steinhardt, “Challenges for superstring cosmology,” Phys.
Lett. B 302 (1993) 196–201, arXiv:hep-th/9212049.
[336] R. Brustein, S. P. de Alwis, and P. Martens, “Cosmological stabilization of moduli
with steep potentials,” Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 126012, arXiv:hep-th/0408160.
[337] J. P. Conlon, R. Kallosh, A. D. Linde, and F. Quevedo, “Volume Modulus Inflation
and the Gravitino Mass Problem,” JCAP 09 (2008) 011, arXiv:0806.0809
[hep-th].
[338] J. P. Conlon and F. Revello, “Catch-me-if-you-can: the overshoot problem and the
weak/inflation hierarchy,” JHEP 11 (2022) 155, arXiv:2207.00567 [hep-th].
98

[339] F. Apers, J. P. Conlon, M. Mosny, and F. Revello, “Kination, meet Kasner: on the
asymptotic cosmology of string compactifications,” JHEP 08 (2023) 156,
arXiv:2212.10293 [hep-th].
[340] M. Cicoli, J. P. Conlon, and F. Quevedo, “Dark radiation in LARGE volume
models,” Phys. Rev. D 87 no. 4, (2013) 043520, arXiv:1208.3562 [hep-ph].
[341] T. Higaki and F. Takahashi, “Dark Radiation and Dark Matter in Large Volume
Compactifications,” JHEP 11 (2012) 125, arXiv:1208.3563 [hep-ph].
[342] N. Gendler, D. J. E. Marsh, L. McAllister, and J. Moritz, “Glimmers from the
Axiverse,” arXiv:2309.13145 [hep-th].
[343] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim et al., “Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological
parameters,” Astron. Astrophys. 641 (2020) A6, arXiv:1807.06209
[astro-ph.CO]. [Erratum: Astron.Astrophys. 652, C4 (2021)].
[344] M. Cicoli, A. Hebecker, J. Jaeckel, and M. Wittner, “Axions in string theory —
slaying the Hydra of dark radiation,” JHEP 09 (2022) 198, arXiv:2203.08833
[hep-th].
[345] L. Visinelli, “Boson stars and oscillatons: A review,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 30
no. 15, (2021) 2130006, arXiv:2109.05481 [gr-qc].
[346] S. Antusch, F. Cefala, S. Krippendorf, F. Muia, S. Orani, and F. Quevedo,
“Oscillons from String Moduli,” JHEP 01 (2018) 083, arXiv:1708.08922
[hep-th].
[347] S. Krippendorf, F. Muia, and F. Quevedo, “Moduli Stars,” JHEP 08 (2018) 070,
arXiv:1806.04690 [hep-th].
[348] N. Aggarwal et al., “Challenges and opportunities of gravitational-wave searches at
MHz to GHz frequencies,” Living Rev. Rel. 24 no. 1, (2021) 4, arXiv:2011.12414
[gr-qc].
[349] N. Kaloper, “de Sitter space decay and cosmological constant relaxation in
unimodular gravity with charged membranes,” Phys. Rev. D 108 no. 2, (2023)
025005, arXiv:2305.02349 [hep-th].
[350] C. P. Burgess, D. Dineen, and F. Quevedo, “Yoga Dark Energy: natural relaxation
and other dark implications of a supersymmetric gravity sector,” JCAP 03 no. 03,
(2022) 064, arXiv:2111.07286 [hep-th].
[351] S. Weinberg, “Anthropic Bound on the Cosmological Constant,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
59 (1987) 2607.

99

[352] R. Bousso, R. Harnik, G. D. Kribs, and G. Perez, “Predicting the Cosmological
Constant from the Causal Entropic Principle,” Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 043513,
arXiv:hep-th/0702115.
[353] R. Bousso and J. Polchinski, “Quantization of four form fluxes and dynamical
neutralization of the cosmological constant,” JHEP 06 (2000) 006,
arXiv:hep-th/0004134.
[354] J. L. Feng, J. March-Russell, S. Sethi, and F. Wilczek, “Saltatory relaxation of the
cosmological constant,” Nucl. Phys. B 602 (2001) 307–328,
arXiv:hep-th/0005276.
[355] R. Bousso, B. Freivogel, and I.-S. Yang, “Properties of the scale factor measure,”
Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 063513, arXiv:0808.3770 [hep-th].
[356] S. R. Coleman and F. De Luccia, “Gravitational Effects on and of Vacuum Decay,”
Phys. Rev. D 21 (1980) 3305.
[357] J. D. Brown and C. Teitelboim, “Neutralization of the Cosmological Constant by
Membrane Creation,” Nucl. Phys. B 297 (1988) 787–836.
[358] W. Fischler, D. Morgan, and J. Polchinski, “Quantization of False Vacuum
Bubbles: A Hamiltonian Treatment of Gravitational Tunneling,” Phys. Rev. D 42
(1990) 4042–4055.
[359] A. H. Guth, “Eternal inflation and its implications,” J. Phys. A 40 (2007)
6811–6826, arXiv:hep-th/0702178.
[360] B. Freivogel, M. Kleban, M. Rodriguez Martinez, and L. Susskind, “Observational
consequences of a landscape,” JHEP 03 (2006) 039, arXiv:hep-th/0505232.
[361] A. Hebecker, T. Mikhail, and P. Soler, “Euclidean wormholes, baby universes, and
their impact on particle physics and cosmology,” Front. Astron. Space Sci. 5 (2018)
35, arXiv:1807.00824 [hep-th].
[362] A. Hebecker, “Lectures on Naturalness, String Landscape and Multiverse,”
arXiv:2008.10625 [hep-th].
[363] J. McNamara and C. Vafa, “Baby Universes, Holography, and the Swampland,”
arXiv:2004.06738 [hep-th].
[364] S. P. De Alwis, F. Muia, V. Pasquarella, and F. Quevedo, “Quantum Transitions
Between Minkowski and de Sitter Spacetimes,” Fortsch. Phys. 68 no. 9, (2020)
2000069, arXiv:1909.01975 [hep-th].
[365] S. Cespedes, S. P. de Alwis, F. Muia, and F. Quevedo, “Lorentzian vacuum
transitions: Open or closed universes?,” Phys. Rev. D 104 no. 2, (2021) 026013,
arXiv:2011.13936 [hep-th].
100

[366] S. Cespedes, S. de Alwis, F. Muia, and F. Quevedo, “Quantum Transitions,
Detailed Balance, Black Holes and Nothingness,” arXiv:2307.13614 [hep-th].
[367] B. Friedrich, A. Hebecker, and J. Walcher, “Cobordism and Bubbles of Anything in
the String Landscape,” arXiv:2310.06021 [hep-th].
[368] J. Carifio, W. J. Cunningham, J. Halverson, D. Krioukov, C. Long, and B. D.
Nelson, “Vacuum Selection from Cosmology on Networks of String Geometries,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 no. 10, (2018) 101602, arXiv:1711.06685 [hep-th].
[369] J. Khoury and O. Parrikar, “Search Optimization, Funnel Topography, and
Dynamical Criticality on the String Landscape,” JCAP 12 (2019) 014,
arXiv:1907.07693 [hep-th].
[370] G. F. Giudice, M. McCullough, and T. You, “Self-organised localisation,” JHEP 10
(2021) 093, arXiv:2105.08617 [hep-ph].
[371] G. Kartvelishvili, J. Khoury, and A. Sharma, “The Self-Organized Critical
Multiverse,” JCAP 02 (2021) 028, arXiv:2003.12594 [hep-th].
[372] J. Khoury and S. S. C. Wong, “Bayesian reasoning in eternal inflation: A solution
to the measure problem,” Phys. Rev. D 108 no. 2, (2023) 023506,
arXiv:2205.11524 [hep-th].
[373] S. Hellerman, N. Kaloper, and L. Susskind, “String theory and quintessence,”
JHEP 06 (2001) 003, arXiv:hep-th/0104180.
[374] W. Fischler, A. Kashani-Poor, R. McNees, and S. Paban, “The Acceleration of the
universe, a challenge for string theory,” JHEP 07 (2001) 003,
arXiv:hep-th/0104181.
[375] P. Svrcek, “Cosmological Constant and Axions in String Theory,”
arXiv:hep-th/0607086.
[376] S. Panda, Y. Sumitomo, and S. P. Trivedi, “Axions as Quintessence in String
Theory,” Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 083506, arXiv:1011.5877 [hep-th].
[377] F. Denef, A. Hebecker, and T. Wrase, “de Sitter swampland conjecture and the
Higgs potential,” Phys. Rev. D 98 no. 8, (2018) 086004, arXiv:1807.06581
[hep-th].
[378] A. Hebecker, T. Skrzypek, and M. Wittner, “The F -term Problem and other
Challenges of Stringy Quintessence,” JHEP 11 (2019) 134, arXiv:1909.08625
[hep-th].
[379] M. Cicoli, F. Cunillera, A. Padilla, and F. G. Pedro, “Quintessence and the
Swampland: The Parametrically Controlled Regime of Moduli Space,” Fortsch.
Phys. 70 no. 4, (2022) 2200009, arXiv:2112.10779 [hep-th].
101

[380] M. Cicoli, F. Cunillera, A. Padilla, and F. G. Pedro, “Quintessence and the
Swampland: The Numerically Controlled Regime of Moduli Space,” Fortsch. Phys.
70 no. 4, (2022) 2200008, arXiv:2112.10783 [hep-th].
[381] D. J. E. Marsh, “Axion Cosmology,” Phys. Rept. 643 (2016) 1–79,
arXiv:1510.07633 [astro-ph.CO].
[382] K. Choi, “Axions and the strong CP problem in M theory,” Phys. Rev. D 56
(1997) 6588–6600, arXiv:hep-th/9706171.
[383] J. P. Conlon, “The QCD axion and moduli stabilisation,” JHEP 05 (2006) 078,
arXiv:hep-th/0602233.
[384] P. Svrcek and E. Witten, “Axions In String Theory,” JHEP 06 (2006) 051,
arXiv:hep-th/0605206.
[385] M. Demirtas, C. Long, L. McAllister, and M. Stillman, “Minimal Surfaces and
Weak Gravity,” JHEP 03 (2020) 021, arXiv:1906.08262 [hep-th].
[386] A. Ashmore, Y.-H. He, and B. A. Ovrut, “Machine Learning Calabi–Yau Metrics,”
Fortsch. Phys. 68 no. 9, (2020) 2000068, arXiv:1910.08605 [hep-th].
[387] W. Cui and J. Gray, “Numerical Metrics, Curvature Expansions and Calabi-Yau
Manifolds,” JHEP 05 (2020) 044, arXiv:1912.11068 [hep-th].
[388] L. B. Anderson, M. Gerdes, J. Gray, S. Krippendorf, N. Raghuram, and F. Ruehle,
“Moduli-dependent Calabi-Yau and SU(3)-structure metrics from Machine
Learning,” JHEP 05 (2021) 013, arXiv:2012.04656 [hep-th].
[389] M. R. Douglas, S. Lakshminarasimhan, and Y. Qi, “Numerical Calabi-Yau metrics
from holomorphic networks,” arXiv:2012.04797 [hep-th].
[390] M. Larfors, A. Lukas, F. Ruehle, and R. Schneider, “Numerical metrics for
complete intersection and Kreuzer–Skarke Calabi–Yau manifolds,” Mach. Learn.
Sci. Tech. 3 no. 3, (2022) 035014, arXiv:2205.13408 [hep-th].
[391] P. Berglund, G. Butbaia, T. Hübsch, V. Jejjala, D. Mayorga Peña, C. Mishra, and
J. Tan, “Machine Learned Calabi-Yau Metrics and Curvature,” arXiv:2211.09801
[hep-th].
[392] M. Gerdes and S. Krippendorf, “CYJAX: A package for Calabi-Yau metrics with
JAX,” Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech. 4 no. 2, (2023) 025031, arXiv:2211.12520
[hep-th].
[393] A. Ashmore, Y.-H. He, E. Heyes, and B. A. Ovrut, “Numerical spectra of the
Laplacian for line bundles on Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces,” JHEP 07 (2023) 164,
arXiv:2305.08901 [hep-th].
102

[394] M. Cicoli, M. Goodsell, and A. Ringwald, “The type IIB string axiverse and its
low-energy phenomenology,” JHEP 10 (2012) 146, arXiv:1206.0819 [hep-th].
[395] I. Broeckel, M. Cicoli, A. Maharana, K. Singh, and K. Sinha, “Moduli stabilisation
and the statistics of axion physics in the landscape,” JHEP 08 (2021) 059,
arXiv:2105.02889 [hep-th]. [Addendum: JHEP 01, 191 (2022)].
[396] M. Demirtas, C. Long, L. McAllister, and M. Stillman, “The Kreuzer-Skarke
Axiverse,” JHEP 04 (2020) 138, arXiv:1808.01282 [hep-th].
[397] A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky, N. Kaloper, and J. March-Russell,
“String Axiverse,” Phys. Rev. D 81 (2010) 123530, arXiv:0905.4720 [hep-th].
[398] M. Demirtas, N. Gendler, C. Long, L. McAllister, and J. Moritz, “PQ axiverse,”
JHEP 06 (2023) 092, arXiv:2112.04503 [hep-th].
[399] M. C. D. Marsh, H. R. Russell, A. C. Fabian, B. P. McNamara, P. Nulsen, and
C. S. Reynolds, “A New Bound on Axion-Like Particles,” JCAP 12 (2017) 036,
arXiv:1703.07354 [hep-ph].
[400] C. S. Reynolds, M. C. D. Marsh, H. R. Russell, A. C. Fabian, R. Smith,
F. Tombesi, and S. Veilleux, “Astrophysical limits on very light axion-like particles
from Chandra grating spectroscopy of NGC 1275,” Astrophys. J. 890 (2020) 59,
arXiv:1907.05475 [hep-ph].
[401] J. S. Reynés, J. H. Matthews, C. S. Reynolds, H. R. Russell, R. N. Smith, and
M. C. D. Marsh, “New constraints on light axion-like particles using Chandra
transmission grating spectroscopy of the powerful cluster-hosted quasar
H1821+643,” Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 510 no. 1, (2021) 1264–1277,
arXiv:2109.03261 [astro-ph.HE].
[402] V. M. Mehta, M. Demirtas, C. Long, D. J. E. Marsh, L. McAllister, and M. J.
Stott, “Superradiance in string theory,” JCAP 07 (2021) 033, arXiv:2103.06812
[hep-th].
[403] J. Halverson, C. Long, B. Nelson, and G. Salinas, “Towards string theory
expectations for photon couplings to axionlike particles,” Phys. Rev. D 100 no. 10,
(2019) 106010, arXiv:1909.05257 [hep-th].
[404] I. G. Irastorza and J. Redondo, “New experimental approaches in the search for
axion-like particles,” Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 102 (2018) 89–159,
arXiv:1801.08127 [hep-ph].
[405] C. B. Adams et al., “Axion Dark Matter,” in Snowmass 2021. 3, 2022.
arXiv:2203.14923 [hep-ex].

103

[406] K. K. Rogers, R. Hložek, A. Laguë, M. M. Ivanov, O. H. E. Philcox, G. Cabass,
K. Akitsu, and D. J. E. Marsh, “Ultra-light axions and the S 8 tension: joint
constraints from the cosmic microwave background and galaxy clustering,” JCAP
06 (2023) 023, arXiv:2301.08361 [astro-ph.CO].
[407] A. Arvanitaki and S. Dubovsky, “Exploring the String Axiverse with Precision
Black Hole Physics,” Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 044026, arXiv:1004.3558 [hep-th].
[408] R. Brito, V. Cardoso, and P. Pani, “Superradiance: New Frontiers in Black Hole
Physics,” Lect. Notes Phys. 906 (2015) pp.1–237, arXiv:1501.06570 [gr-qc].
[409] P. Candelas, X. De La Ossa, A. Font, S. H. Katz, and D. R. Morrison, “Mirror
symmetry for two parameter models. 1.,” Nucl. Phys. B 416 (1994) 481–538,
arXiv:hep-th/9308083.
[410] P. Candelas, A. Font, S. H. Katz, and D. R. Morrison, “Mirror symmetry for two
parameter models. 2.,” Nucl. Phys. B 429 (1994) 626–674, arXiv:hep-th/9403187.
[411] R. Altman, J. Gray, Y.-H. He, V. Jejjala, and B. D. Nelson, “A Calabi-Yau
Database: Threefolds Constructed from the Kreuzer-Skarke List,” JHEP 02 (2015)
158, arXiv:1411.1418 [hep-th].
[412] R. Blumenhagen, B. Jurke, T. Rahn, and H. Roschy, “Cohomology of Line Bundles:
A Computational Algorithm,” J. Math. Phys. 51 (2010) 103525, arXiv:1003.5217
[hep-th].
[413] M. Kreuzer and H. Skarke, “PALP: A Package for analyzing lattice polytopes with
applications to toric geometry,” Comput. Phys. Commun. 157 (2004) 87–106,
arXiv:math/0204356.
[414] K. Bull, Y.-H. He, V. Jejjala, and C. Mishra, “Machine Learning CICY
Threefolds,” Phys. Lett. B 785 (2018) 65–72, arXiv:1806.03121 [hep-th].
[415] D. S. Berman, Y.-H. He, and E. Hirst, “Machine learning Calabi-Yau
hypersurfaces,” Phys. Rev. D 105 no. 6, (2022) 066002, arXiv:2112.06350
[hep-th].
[416] V. Jejjala, W. Taylor, and A. Turner, “Identifying equivalent Calabi–Yau
topologies: A discrete challenge from math and physics for machine learning,” in
Nankai Symposium on Mathematical Dialogues: In celebration of S.S.Chern’s 110th
anniversary. 2, 2022. arXiv:2202.07590 [hep-th].
[417] P. Berglund, Y.-H. He, E. Heyes, E. Hirst, V. Jejjala, and A. Lukas, “New
Calabi-Yau Manifolds from Genetic Algorithms,” arXiv:2306.06159 [hep-th].

104

[418] H. Erbin, R. Finotello, R. Schneider, and M. Tamaazousti, “Deep multi-task
mining Calabi–Yau four-folds,” Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech. 3 no. 1, (2022) 015006,
arXiv:2108.02221 [hep-th].
[419] D. Klaewer and L. Schlechter, “Machine Learning Line Bundle Cohomologies of
Hypersurfaces in Toric Varieties,” Phys. Lett. B 789 (2019) 438–443,
arXiv:1809.02547 [hep-th].
[420] A. Cole, A. Schachner, and G. Shiu, “Searching the Landscape of Flux Vacua with
Genetic Algorithms,” JHEP 11 (2019) 045, arXiv:1907.10072 [hep-th].
[421] A. Cole, S. Krippendorf, A. Schachner, and G. Shiu, “Probing the Structure of
String Theory Vacua with Genetic Algorithms and Reinforcement Learning,”
arXiv:2111.11466 [hep-th].
[422] S. Krippendorf, R. Kroepsch, and M. Syvaeri, “Revealing systematics in
phenomenologically viable flux vacua with reinforcement learning,”
arXiv:2107.04039 [hep-th].
[423] F. Ruehle, “Data science applications to string theory,” Phys. Rept. 839 (2020)
1–117.
[424] M. Kreuzer and H. Skarke, “Complete classification of reflexive polyhedra in
four-dimensions,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4 (2000) 1209–1230,
arXiv:hep-th/0002240.
[425] N. MacFadden, “Efficient Algorithm for Generating Homotopy Inequivalent
Calabi-Yaus,” arXiv:2309.10855 [hep-th].
[426] M. Bies and A. P. Turner, “Ftheorytools – julia tools for f-theory
compactifications.”
https://github.com/Julia-meets-String-Theory/FTheoryTools.jl, 2022.
[427] D. Baumann, A. Dymarsky, I. R. Klebanov, J. M. Maldacena, L. P. McAllister, and
A. Murugan, “On D3-brane Potentials in Compactifications with Fluxes and
Wrapped D-branes,” JHEP 11 (2006) 031, arXiv:hep-th/0607050.
[428] S. Alexandrov, A. H. Fırat, M. Kim, A. Sen, and B. Stefański, “D-instanton
induced superpotential,” JHEP 07 (2022) 090, arXiv:2204.02981 [hep-th].
[429] A. Sen, “D-instanton Perturbation Theory,” JHEP 08 (2020) 075,
arXiv:2002.04043 [hep-th].
[430] A. Sen, “Normalization of type IIB D-instanton amplitudes,” JHEP 12 (2021) 146,
arXiv:2104.11109 [hep-th].

105

[431] S. Alexandrov, A. Sen, and B. Stefański, “Euclidean D-branes in type IIB string
theory on Calabi-Yau threefolds,” JHEP 12 (2021) 044, arXiv:2110.06949
[hep-th].
[432] B. S. Acharya and M. R. Douglas, “A Finite landscape?,” arXiv:hep-th/0606212.
[433] T. W. Grimm, “Moduli space holography and the finiteness of flux vacua,” JHEP
10 (2021) 153, arXiv:2010.15838 [hep-th].
[434] B. Bakker, T. W. Grimm, C. Schnell, and J. Tsimerman, “Finiteness for self-dual
classes in integral variations of Hodge structure,” arXiv:2112.06995 [math.AG].
[435] A. P. Braun and R. Valandro, “G4 flux, algebraic cycles and complex structure
moduli stabilization,” JHEP 01 (2021) 207, arXiv:2009.11873 [hep-th].
[436] T. W. Grimm, E. Plauschinn, and D. van de Heisteeg, “Moduli stabilization in
asymptotic flux compactifications,” JHEP 03 (2022) 117, arXiv:2110.05511
[hep-th].
[437] K. Tsagkaris and E. Plauschinn, “Moduli stabilization in type IIB orientifolds at
h2,1 = 50,” JHEP 03 (2023) 049, arXiv:2207.13721 [hep-th].
[438] E. Plauschinn and L. Schlechter, “Flux vacua of the mirror octic,”
arXiv:2310.06040 [hep-th].
[439] N. Gendler, O. Janssen, M. Kleban, J. La Madrid, and V. M. Mehta, “Axion
minima in string theory,” arXiv:2309.01831 [hep-th].
[440] A. Dubey, S. Krippendorf, and A. Schachner, “JAXVacua – A Framework for
Sampling String Vacua,” arXiv:2306.06160 [hep-th].
[441] J. Ebelt, S. Krippendorf, and A. Schachner, “W0 sample =
np.random.normal(0,1)?,” arXiv:2307.15749 [hep-th].

106

