Toric geometry and local Calabi-Yau varieties
An introduction to toric geometry (for physicists)

arXiv:0901.3695v2 [hep-th] 8 May 2009

Cyril Closset
Physique Théorique et Mathématique
and International Solvay Institutes
Université Libre de Bruxelles
CP 231, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium

cyril.closset @ ulb.ac.be

Abstract
These lecture notes are an introduction to toric geometry. Particular focus is put on the
description of toric local Calabi-Yau varieties, such as needed in applications to the AdS/CFT
correspondence in string theory.
The point of view taken in these lectures is mostly algebro-geometric but no prior knowledge of algebraic geometry is assumed. After introducing the necessary mathematical definitions, we discuss the construction of toric varieties as holomorphic quotients. We discuss
the resolution and deformation of toric Calabi-Yau singularities. We also explain the gauged
linear sigma-model (GLSM) Kähler quotient construction.
These notes are based on lectures given by the author at the Modave Summer School in
Mathematical Physics 2008.

Contents
1 Introduction
1
1.1 A digression: supersymmetric gauge theories and D-branes at toric singularities 2
1.2 Outline of the lectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2 Algebraic geometry: the gist of it
2.1 Affine varieties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Projective varieties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Spectrum and scheme, in two words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4
5
7
8

3 The Calabi-Yau condition
3.1 Holomorphic vector bundles and line bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Calabi-Yau manifolds. Kähler and complex moduli . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Divisors and line bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9
10
10
12

4 Toric geometry 1: The algebraic story
4.1 Cones and fan. Homogeneous coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Coordinate rings and dual cones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Calabi-Yau toric varieties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Toric diagrams and p-q webs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13
13
16
19
20

5 Dealing with toric singularities
5.1 Resolution of toric singularities and simplicial decomposition . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Deformation of toric singularities: the versal space . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22
23
25

6 Toric geometry 2: Gauged linear sigma-model
6.1 Kähler quotient and moment maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 The GLSM story . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Toric varieties as torus fibration of polytopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28
28
29
30

A A few notions of algebra
A.1 Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32
34

1

Introduction

The aim of these lectures is to explain toric geometry to young researchers in theoretical
physics who might have had no prior exposure to the basic concepts of algebraic geometry.
Since the subject of algebraic geometry is often seen as very abstract, on the one hand, while
1

on the other hand string theorists routinely use it in a quite heuristic manner that might
unsettle the young practitioner, I attempted here to find some kind of equilibrium between
rigor and readability. We are lucky that toric geometry is precisely a very “concrete” area
of algebraic geometry, so we can work on many examples.
An example that we will work with extensively is a space called the conifold, which has
been studied from many perspectives by string theorists in the last two decades. The conifold
began its physics career in the late ’80s, in the context of the study of the large space of
possible string compactifications [1, 2, 3].
The physicist approach taken here cannot replace the benefits of a formal algebraic geometry course, or of some good old-fashioned self-tuition in the mathematical literature, but
my hope in preparing these lectures for the 2008 Modave Summer School was to at least
make the subject look less scary to beginning graduate students.

1.1

A digression: supersymmetric gauge theories and D-branes at
toric singularities

A supersymmetric gauge theory in four dimensions is defined at the classical level by its
Lagrangian density. For an introduction, see for instance [4, 5]. In superspace, consider
the theory of k chiral superfields Φi (i = 1, · · · , k) charged under the gauge group in some
representations. Wα is the gaugino chiral superfield, containing the field strength. We have
Z
Z
τ
2
2
† 2V
L = d θd θ Φ e Φ + d2 θ{
TrW α Wα + W (Φ)} + c.c.
(1)
16πi
where all flavor and gauge indices have been omitted. The superpotential W is an holomorphic polynomial in the Φi . The space of vacua is given by the vanishing of the D- and
F -terms,
X †
Da ≡
Φi Trai Φi = 0 ,
(2)
i

Fi†

∂W
= 0.
≡
∂Φi

(3)

Here, the Φi are in arbitrary representations ri of the gauge group, so that the above conditions are matrix relations which transform non-trivially under the gauge group. It is
an important result [6] that the full space of vacua can be described as an algebraic variety, which roughly means that it is a complex hypersurface (or intersection thereof) in
Cm ∼
= {x1 , · · · , xm }. Here the xj are gauge invariant polynomials, for instance corresponding to operators of the form
x ∼ Tr P (Φ),
(4)
with P a polynomial function of the Φi , and the trace is over all gauge indices. Restricting to
gauge invariant polynomials is equivalent to fixing the gauge freedom through the imposition
of the D-terms constraints (2), as was rigorously shown in [6]. The advantage is that we are
2

now dealing with holomorphic quantities (only Φ appears, not Φ† ). The relations Fi = 0
then imply relations between the variables xj , which can be written as polynomial relations
p1 (x1 , · · · , xm ) = 0,

p2 (x1 , · · · , xm ) = 0, · · ·

(5)

This is precisely the way to define an algebraic variety. We will make this more precise in
section 2.1.
From this discussion, we could guess that an algebro-geometric language can be very useful
in order to deal with supersymmetric theories. See [7] for a recent work emphasizing this
basic point: the space of vacua of any supersymmetric gauge theory is algebraic in nature.
Where does toric geometry fit in this context? There exist a very interesting class of
supersymmetric gauge theories whose space of vacua is toric. These theories are the socalled toric quiver gauge theories. They appear naturally in string theory as the low energy
effective theory of D3-branes probing toric Calabi-Yau singularities.
If you have no idea what the previous paragraph refers to, do not panic. The purpose of
these lectures is precisely to explain what a “toric Calabi-Yau singularity” is, and to offer
some basic mathematical tools necessary to deal with models involving them in string theory.
These lectures can also serve as a starting point to learn more about the use of toric
geometry in many other areas of string theory. For instance, one can describe many CalabiYau compactification manifolds as hypersurfaces in compact toric varieties, as reviewed in [8,
9, 10, 12]. We will not review this construction here, focusing instead on local properties. We
nevertheless explain the general case of compact toric varieties, emphasizing the importance
of the “local” toric affine varieties as building blocks.

1.2

Outline of the lectures

Since toric geometry is a part of algebraic geometry, we will start in the next section with an
introduction to the basic concepts of algebraic geometry. We will first define affine varieties,
explaining how there is an equivalence between geometric objects (the varieties) and algebraic
objects (some particular sets of polynomials called prime ideals). Some important definitions
are relegated to the Appendix. Next we will briefly talk about projective space, as a warm
up, since it is a simple example of a toric variety.
In section 3 we will discuss the Calabi-Yau condition. To do so we will need to introduce
the notion of a line bundle. That part of the lectures is not self-contained. It uses differential
geometry concepts that are hopefully familiar to the general reader, mostly the basics of the
theory of fiber bundles.
In section 4 we will delve into the core of the subject, defining toric varieties as particular
holomorphic quotients, and showing how to introduce local coordinates in term of affine
varieties (affine patches). Remark that we will mainly be interested in local properties, and
so we will mostly concentrate on non-compact toric varieties. In particular we will consider
Calabi-Yau toric varieties, which are always non-compact.

3

In section 5 we will introduce the notion of singularity in algebraic geometry, and we will
show how we can deal with singular points in the toric case.
In section 6 we introduce a second way to define toric varieties, the Kähler quotient, also
known as gauged linear sigma-model.
I tried to make the following as self-contained as I could, but general knowledge of complex geometry might help at times, especially in section 3, as already mentioned. Good
introductions to complex geometry and Calabi-Yau manifolds can be found for instance in
[8, 10, 11]. The more thirsty student might plunge into [13], which I found a very good and
surprisingly physicist-friendly mathematical reference.
I also hope that these lectures will serve as entry point into the mathematical literature on
toric geometry, such as [14]. Posterior developments as explained in [15] are also important,
as they actually simplify matters. See [16] for a nice account from a physicist perspective.

2

Algebraic geometry: the gist of it

We know that in geometry we always deal with some bunch of “points” that has more or less
structure to it. A set of points together with a topology is called a topological space. Recall
that a topology is what you define to be the open sets in your space, hence it provides a
notion of locality. A topological space that locally looks like the euclidian space Rn is called
a manifold. If moreover the transition functions are differentiable (C ∞ for instance), it is
called a differentiable manifold.
Smooth algebraic varieties can be seen as particular kind of manifolds which are simpler in
some sense. Roughly speaking, they can be thought of as manifolds with rational transition
functions1 . On the other hand, generic algebraic varieties are not manifolds, since they allow
for various singularities; in that sense they are more general.
Remark that it is possible to define algebraic varieties intrinsically, in a way similar to
what one does in differential geometry, but for doing so we would need to introduce the
language of sheaves, and that would carry us too far afield. We will follow the more down
to earth route, which defines algebraic varieties extrinsically as the algebraic set of zeros of
some polynomials. Given a function f : Rn → R, we can define a subset of Rn ,
Rn ⊃ Σ

=

{f −1(0)}

=

{x ∈ Rn | f (x) = 0},

which locally inherits its manifold structure from Rn . However, this Σ is badly singular in
general. If we restrict f to be a polynomial, things become much more tractable. It is one
of the great advantages of the algebraic side of algebraic-geometry that singularities become
easier to deal with.
Therefore we are now considering algebraic equations only. Hence it is very convenient
to work with polynomials valued in C, because C is algebraically complete. From now
1

For toric varieties we will see that it is precisely that.

4

on, unless otherwise stated, all variables are C-valued, and by dimension we always mean
complex dimension (half the real dimension).
In this section we will first define affine varieties, which are the basic objects of algebraic
geometry. Some algebraic definitions are reviewed in Appendix A. Next we define the projective space CPn , which provides us with a particular example of the holomorphic quotient
construction that we will encounter in detail when we define toric varieties in section 4. For
completeness we also define projective varieties, which are subvarieties of CPn .

2.1

Affine varieties

Varieties defined as algebraic subset of Cn lead to the concept of affine varieties. Consider
Cn = {(x1 , · · · , xn )}. Associated to it, we have the ring of polynomials in n variables, which
is denoted by
Rn ≡ C[x1 , · · · , xn ] .
(6)
It is obviously a ring (it is an additive group together with an associative product, distributive
with respect to the addition); moreover it is a commutative ring. An algebraic subset Z(T )
of Cn is defined as the zero locus of a set of polynomials T ⊂ Rn :
Z(T ) = {(x1 , · · · , xn ) ∈ Cn | pi(x1 , · · · , xn ) = 0, ∀pi ∈ T }.

(7)

On the other hand, for any subset Y ⊂ Cn , we denote the set of all polynomials that vanish
on Y by J (Y ). A natural question to ask is what is the relation between J (Z(T )) and T .
This is the content of the famous Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz. See the Appendix A.
The whole idea of algebraic geometry is that you can define a space by the algebra of
functions defined on it2 . Let us look at the polynomials which give rise to well defined
functions on the algebraic set (7). Two polynomials p1 and p2 will take the same value on
Z(T ) if p1 − p2 = t, with some t ∈ T , since t vanishes on Z(T ) by definition. We then only
need to consider the equivalence classes of polynomials in Rn that are linearly equivalent up
to elements of T . This is denoted by
A(Z(T )) = C[x1 , · · · , xn ]/T .

(8)

We want this quotient to define a proper ring of functions on Z(T ). This happens if T is
an ideal of the ring C[x1 , · · · , xn ]. An ideal of a ring R is a subset I ⊂ R such that I is a
subgroup for the addition and is invariant under multiplication by any element in R. Given
any set of polynomials, it is not difficult to extend it into a full-fledged ideal, as one can see
in the examples below. One usually denote the ideal generated this way by (p1 , · · · , pk ).
Examples:
2

Note that the ring of polynomials is naturally an algebra too.

5

• Take the ring C[x] of polynomials in x. The set {x} is not an ideal (for instance it
is not even a subgroup), but we can generate one simply by multiplying with every
element of C[x]. The ideal, denoted (x), is simply the set of all polynomials without
constant term. The quotient by the ideal simply gives the constants:
C[x]/(x) = C.

(9)

• Consider the ideal (x2 ) instead. The quotient C[x]/(x2 ) is a ring generated by the two
elements {1, x} such that x.x = 0. Such a x is called a zero divisor.
• On the ring C[x, y], consider the ideal (xy). The quotient ring C[x, y]/(xy) has two
zero divisors (x and y).
This last example corresponds to the surface xy = 0 in C2 . It consists of two branches
which meet at the origin. In general, any algebraic set will consist of several “branches”,
Z(T ) = Σ1 ∪ · · · ∪ Σm ,

(10)

and correspondingly the quotient ring (8) will have zero divisors. To avoid zero divisors, one
must ask that the ideal be prime (see the Appendix A for the definition). In our example,
(xy) is not prime, but it has a decomposition in two prime factors (x) and (y). These two
ideals correspond to the two “branches” x = 0 and y = 0.
Each component in the decomposition (10) is called irreducible if it cannot be decomposed
further.
Definition: An affine variety is an irreducible algebraic subset of Cn .
It is called “affine” simply because it is defined in Cn , which is an affine space (i.e. a
vector space where you can shift the origin anywhere).
The very important thing to remember is that there is a one-to-one correspondence between affine varieties and prime ideals:
Σ = Z(P )

1−1

←→

A(Σ) = C[x1 , · · · , xn ]/P.

(11)

This is a consequence of the Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz, which implies that if T = P is a prime
ideal3 , then the set of polynomials vanishing on Z(P ) is P itself:
J (Z(P )) = P.
3

(12)

Actually this holds for P radical, which is a weaker condition. The one-to-one correspondence is between
algebraic sets and radical ideals. Remark that in dimension one, it implies that a polynomial with isolated
zeros is fully determined by its roots; the Nullstellensatz is a generalisation of the fundamental theorem of
algebra to higher dimensions.

6

Definition: The ring A(Σ) defined as in (8),
A(Σ) = C[x1 , · · · , xn ]/P,

(13)

is called the coordinate ring, or structure ring, of the affine variety Σ. This construction is
familiar from supersymmetric theories, as recalled in section 1.1: there the xi are the gauge
invariants operators, and P is generated by the F-terms. The structure ring in that case is
called the chiral ring.
Example: the conifold. The ubiquitous conifold, C0 , which has been such a central tool
in recent developments in string theory, is an affine variety defined by a single equation in
C4 ,
x1 x2 − x3 x4 = 0.
(14)
Mathematicians call it a “threefold ordinary double point”, or node. Its coordinate ring is
A(C0 ) = C[x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ]/(x1 x2 − x3 x4 ).

2.2

(15)

Projective varieties

Affine varieties, being defined by polynomial equations in Cn , are not compact. The projective space CPn is the simplest example of a compact algebraic variety (actually it is toric
too). The standard way to define it is as the set of complex lines in Cn+1 ,
CPn =

(Cn+1 \{0})
.
C∗

(16)

The action of C∗ = C\{0} is to multiply all coordinates in Cn+1 by λ ∈ C∗ , which defines
the equivalence relation
[x0 , · · · , xn ] ∼ [λx0 , · · · , λxn ].
(17)
The origin {0} was removed before taking the quotient so that C∗ may act freely. The
resulting space is fully regular. The xi are called homogeneous coordinates, and a point in
CPn is represented by the equivalence class [x0 , · · · , xn ]. We can cover CPn with n + 1 affine
(i)
patches, one for each xi 6= 0. The local coordinates on the i-patch are zk = xk /xi , and the
transition functions are the rational functions
(j)
zk
(i) (j)
zk (z ) = (j) .
zi

(18)

The Riemann sphere CP1 is the best known example. It has two patches, and the transition
function on the equator is zN = 1/zS .
We can define subvarieties of CPn by taking the vanishing locus of a set of polynomials
pi ∈ Rn+1 . For the equations pi = 0 to make sense, they should be constant on any
7

equivalence class [x0 , · · · , xi ], which means the p’s are homogeneous (i.e. they are sums of
monomials of fixed degree):
pi (x0 , · · · , xn ) ∼ λd pi (x0 , · · · , xn ).

(19)

Definition: Given a homogeneous prime ideal Ph in Rn+1 , the associated projective
variety is defined as
Σ(Ph ) = { [x0 , · · · , xn ] | pi = 0 ∀pi ∈ Ph ⊂ Rn+1 }.

(20)

It is easy to check that if the pi ’s are homogenous of degree d, so is the ideal (pi ).
The homogeneous coordinate ring is denoted by
S(Σ) = Rn+1 /Ph .

(21)

Projective plane curves. In CP2 , consider a hypersurface defined by a single polynomial
p of degree d. If moreover
∂p(x)
= 0 ∀i,
∂xi

∀x s.th. p(x) = 0 ,

(22)

the curve is regular; it is a Riemann surface. Such Riemann surfaces are classified by their
genus. There exists a theorem stating that
g=

(d − 1)(d − 2)
.
2

(23)

In particular, for d = 3, we have a torus, or elliptic curve (g = 1). The general equation
reads
X
cijk xi0 xj1 xk2 = 0.
(24)
i+j+k=3

We have 10 parameters here. However 9 of them can be removed by a Gl(3, C) transformation on the homogeneous coordinates. This leaves us with one parameter, which is basically
the complex structure modulus of the torus. We will come back to the important issue of
complex structure moduli later on in these lectures.
Remark that there are many more algebraic varieties than just affine and projective ones.
In general, one can patch together affine varieties to obtain any algebraic variety, similarly
to the idea of patching together open sets to form manifolds in differential geometry. We
will see this explicitly in the simpler context of toric varieties.

2.3

Spectrum and scheme, in two words

Let us introduce the notion of spectrum of a ring. This is done only to set a useful notation
that you might often encounter in the literature. The concepts of spectrum and scheme stem
8

from taking seriously the idea that it is really the algebra of functions on it which defines a
space. One starts with a purely algebraic object : given any ring A, one defines its spectrum
Spec(A) ≡ {P ⊂ A},

(25)

to be the set of all prime ideals of A (except A itself). This set can be given a natural
topology, and it is then shown that, in the particular case of the coordinate ring of an affine
variety,
Spec(A(Σ)) ∼
(26)
= Σ,
up to important subtleties that we shall willfully skip (in particular we are really talking
about the maximal ideals here). The scheme structure is then obtained by introducing local
coordinates by means of a so-called structure sheaf (for interesting introductions to sheaf
concepts in physics, see for instance [17, 18]).

3

The Calabi-Yau condition

For applications to “physics” (string theory in fact), we are mostly dealing with so-called
Calabi-Yau (CY) varieties. The Calabi condition is a topological condition that implies
(by Yau’s theorem) that there exist a Ricci-flat metric on the variety which satisfies that
condition. Hence a Calabi-Yau manifold is a vacuum solution to the Einstein field equations,
which is a necessary condition for being a semi-classical background of string theory (in the
absence of flux).
The extension to Calabi-Yau varieties with singularities is interesting too, because many
new stringy phenomena like topology changing processes occur in the presence of singularities
(since in the -inadequate- language of Riemannian geometry, one could say that a singular
point has infinite curvature, hence Planck-scale effects must dominate there). Algebraic
geometry offers some tools to tackle these important string theory questions.
Moreover, in the context of AdS/CFT, one considers objects called D-branes located at
singular points in local Calabi-Yau varieties. There is an interesting correspondence between
the algebraic structure of the singularity and the details of the conformal field theory: the
number of gauge groups, the matter content and the classical interactions in the CFT can
in principle be deduced from the geometry alone.
In this section we consider algebraic manifolds, i.e. non-singular algebraic varieties. It is
fair to warn the reader that we will be applying results of this section in singular cases in
the next section, so keep your eyes peeled.
An algebraic manifold is obviously a complex manifold: all the quantities we are dealing
with are holomorphic by construction, and the variety inherits its complex structure from
the embedding space Cn or CPn .
In this section, since we deal with manifolds, we can take a more direct, “intrinsic”,
differential-geometric standpoint. This will simplify matter, since differential geometry is
bound to be more familiar to the reader.
9

3.1

Holomorphic vector bundles and line bundles

Consider a complex manifold X of dimension m. On every open set we have local coordinate
functions z1 , · · · , zm , and we can define the exterior algebra of these coordinate functions,
generated by one-forms
dz1 , · · · , dzm .
(27)
At any point p in the open set, {dzi (p)} form a basis for the holomorphic cotangent space
Tp∗ X at p.
The multiplication operation on forms is the exterior product. All in all we have 2m
linearly independent elements
1,

dzi ,

dzi1 ∧ dzi2 ,

··· ,

dzi1 ∧ · · · ∧ dzim ,

(28)

which form a graded algebra. At each degree, p-forms at any particular point span a vector
n!
space of dimension p!(n−p!)
.
Using holomorphic Gl(m, C)-valued transition functions, we can patch all cotangent spaces
together into the holomorphic cotangent bundle T ∗ X:
Cm

−→

T ∗X

π

−→

X,

(29)

which is itself a manifold of dimension 2m. This is a particular case of an holomorphic vector
bundle E,
π
Ck −→ E −→ X ,
(30)
with Ck the fiber, and π the natural projection, which is an holomorphic map. k is called
the rank of the bundle.
Definition: An holomorphic line bundle (or line bundle for short) is an holomorphic
vector bundle of rank one.
A very important line bundle is the canonical bundle KX . It is defined as the mth exterior
product of T ∗ X,
π
C −→ KX ≡ Λ(m,0) T ∗ X −→ X .
(31)
Sections of the canonical bundle are holomorphic m-forms, that we can write (on each coordinate patch)
Ω = f (z)dz1 ∧ · · · ∧ dzm ,
(32)
for f (z) some holomorphic function.

3.2

Calabi-Yau manifolds. Kähler and complex moduli

The Calabi-Yau condition is that the canonical bundle be trivial, i.e.
Λ(m,0) T ∗ X

∼
=

C × X.

(33)

This implies the existence of a never vanishing global section. Standard arguments then
imply that the function f (z) in (32) must be a constant. This unique (up to rescaling by a
constant) Ω is usually called the holomorphic m-form of the Calabi-Yau manifold X.
10

Kähler structure. A complex manifold can be endowed with a Kähler structure. There
is no room here to explain in detail what this is, see [8, 10]. In two words though, a
Kähler structure is a symplectic structure compatible with the complex structure: you need
a closed and non-degenerate (1, 1)-form ω. The nice thing is that complex structure plus
Kähler structure implies there is a compatible Riemannian structure, i.e. a hermitian metric.
This metric is defined by
g(∂z , ∂¯z̄ ) = ω(∂z , i ∂¯z̄ )
(34)
for any two vectors ∂z , ∂¯z̄ in the tangent space (holomorphic and anti-holomorphic).
The Kahler form ω is a representative of a Dolbeault cohomology class4
[ω] ∈ H 1,1 (X).

(35)

[ω] is called the Kähler class of ω.
Now, we can state Yau’s theorem (Yau proved a conjecture made earlier by Calabi):
CY Theorem : Given X a compact complex manifold with trivial canonical bundle, and
given a Kähler form ω̃ on X, there exist a unique Ricci flat metric in the Kähler class of ω̃.
That is, a unique Ricci-flat metric given by (34) for some ω ∈ [ω̃].
On the other hand, it is “easy” to show that Ricci-flatness implies the triviality of the line
bundle. For a non-compact manifold, the theorem does not hold (strictly speaking). One
can still find a Ricci-flat metric in general, but one must specify some boundary conditions
at infinity.
Kähler moduli space. Given a Calabi-Yau manifold X, we see there are continuous
families of Ricci-flat metrics, one for each cohomology class
1,1

[ω]

=

h
X

λi [ω]i .

(36)

i=1

These parameters λ are coordinates in a vector space H 1,1 (X) (here the [ω]i are basis vectors).
It is called the Kähler moduli space of X. Its dimension is denoted by h1,1 .
Complex moduli space. Given an algebraic variety, if one modifies the equation continuously, varying some parameters, the variety will be “deformed” accordingly. This is called
a variation of the complex structure.
Consider the example of the torus of section 2.2; we saw there are 10 parameters one can
vary, but 9 of them do not change the complex structure, because they are just a linear
reshuffling of the embedding space coordinates, so the complex moduli space of the torus is
one dimensional.
4

Again a word I will not define. See for instance [8].

11

Consider also the conifold, defined by x1 x2 − x3 x4 . If I write, for instance,
x1 x2 − bx3 x4 + cx4 = 0,

(37)

the constants b and c can obviously be absorbed in a redefinition of x3 , with x′3 = bx3 − c.
For an affine variety in Cn , we can transform the variables by
Gl(n, C) ⋉ Tn ,

(38)

with Tn the group of translations. In the case of C0 in C4 , we have 15 possible parameters for
a generic polynomial of degree 2. However most of them can be removed by a Gl(4, C) ⋉ T4
transformation. One can check that the only parameter which cannot be removed by such a
transformation is the constant term,
x1 x2 − x3 x4 − a = 0.

(39)

Such a space is called the deformed conifold, and it is regular.
The space of all complex deformations of an algebraic variety X is called the complex
moduli space of X. It is a rather complicated space. Its linearisation (the tangent space) is
given by the cohomology group H m−1,1 (X) (m the dimension of X) in the case of Calabi-Yau
manifolds. In general, the question is much more complicated. In the particular case of the
theory of complex deformations of toric Calabi-Yau singularities, there is some important
results to be learned, as we will see.

3.3

Divisors and line bundles

Definition: A (Weyl) divisor D of a complex variety X is a linear combination (a formal
sum with integer coefficients) of codimension one irreducible subvarieties,
X
D=
ni Vi , ni ∈ Z, Vi ⊂ X.
(40)
i

If all ni ≥ 0, the divisor D is said to be effective.
To any line bundle L with a regular section s (which means that on any open set Uα , sα
is a polynomial in the local coordinates) we have an associated hypersurface Y in X defined
by
Y = {s(p) = 0, p ∈ X}.
(41)
We can decompose Y into irreducible parts. On any affine patch, the polynomial sα can
be factorized in C[x1 , · · · , xn ]. In fact, (sα ) is decomposed into prime ideals, and one keeps
track of the multiplicity5 ni of each distinct ideal Pi . The prime ideal Pi corresponds to
the subvariety Vi in (40). More precisely, one should of course patch all the Viα together to
construct Vi ⊂ X.
5

There is a multiplicity because the ideal (sα ) is not radical in general.

12

P
Going the other way around, an effective divisor D =
i ni Vi defines a line bundle,
denoted OX (D). By definition its sections will vanish on each Vi with a zero of order ni .
On can generalize this construction to any divisor, where now ni < 0 corresponds to a
pole of order ni for the corresponding sections of OX (D).
Example. On X = CPn , we can set zi = 0 (zi an homogeneous coordinate). It corresponds to the hyperplane H (any Hi = {zi = 0} is linearly equivalent to the others). A
general divisor is then D = nH, n ∈ Z. Its associated line bundle is usually denoted O(n).
Note that O(−1), corresponding to D = −H, is really the dual of the hyperplane line bundle
(i.e. its sections are in Hom(O(1), C)). It is called the tautological line bundle of CPn .

4

Toric geometry 1: The algebraic story

We are now ready to discuss toric geometry. In this section we define a toric variety as a
particular holomorphic quotient of Cn .
Definition: A toric variety X (of dimension m) is an algebraic variety containing the
algebraic torus T = (C∗ )m as a dense open subset, together with a natural action T×X → X.
We can write X as
{Cn \Z∆ }
X∆ =
.
(42)
G
Here, the group
(43)
G∼
= (C∗ )n−m × Γ,
is an algebraic torus times an abelian discrete group Γ. This construction generalizes the
one for projective spaces. For it to make sense, we have to specify a set of points Z∆ ⊂ Cn ,
and of course we must know how G acts on Cn .

4.1

Cones and fan. Homogeneous coordinates

All this data defining a toric variety can be encoded in a simple auxiliary object called a
fan. Hence the fan can be taken to define the toric variety. An equivalent definition will
be in term of the gauged linear sigma-model of section 6: the same data is present in both
definitions, in particular the charge matrix to be defined momentarily. Moreover, this data
is combinatoric, which means that is is given by discrete quantities. What makes toric
geometry attractive is that complicated geometric problems can often be reduced to simpler
combinatoric problems.
Let N ∼
= Zm be a lattice, and NR = N ⊗ R the vector space obtained by allowing real
coefficients.
Definition: A strongly convex rational polyhedral cone σ ⊂ NR , or cone for short, is a

13

set
σ={

X

ai vi

| ai ≥ 0},

(44)

i

generated by a finite set of vectors {vi }ni=1 in N, and such that σ ∩ (−σ) = {0} (“strong
convexity”).
Definition: A fan is a collection ∆ of cones in NR such that
(i) each face of a cone is also a cone,
(ii) the intersection of two cones is a face of each.
Let us call ∆(1) the set of one-dimensional cones in NR . The corresponding vectors in N
are denoted (v1 , · · · , vn ). To each vi , one associates a homogeneous coordinate zi . These are
the coordinates on Cn in the holomorphic quotient construction (42).
Remark that we always have n ≥ m. The (m × n) matrix
(vik ) = (v1k , · · · , vnk )

(45)

(with k = 1, · · · , m) induces a map
φ : Cn → Cm : (z1 , · · · , zn ) 7→ (

Y

vi1
n
i=1 zi , · · · ,

Y

vim
n
i=1 zi ).

(46)

We define G̃ = (C∗ )n−m ⊂ G to be the kernel of φ:
G̃ = Ker(φ).

(47)

It is easily seen that G̃ acts on Cn as
G̃ ⊃ (C∗ )a :

a

a

(z1 , · · · , zn ) 7→ (λQ1 z1 , · · · , λQn zn )

(48)

for each a, where the charge vectors Qa are in the kernel of the linear map (45), that is:
X
(vik )Qai = 0.
(49)
i

Hence, practically speaking, given a fan with n vectors in N we must find the n − m linear
relations among them. The coefficients are precisely the Qai above.
The discrete group Γ ⊂ G is defined as
Γ = N/N ′ ,

(50)

where N ′ ⊂ N is the sublattice generated over Z by the vectors vi . The quotient by this Γ
gives rise to so-called orbifold singularities.
Last but not least piece of data in the construction, the zero set Z∆ is found as follows:
For any subset of ∆(1) (corresponding to vectors vi1 , · · · , vil ) which do not generate a cone
14

Figure 1: The toric fan of CP2 . Notice that it contains 7 cones: three top-dimensional ones (of
dimension 2), three 1-dimensional ones (generated by the vectors), and a single 0-dimensional one
(the point in the center).

in ∆, associate an algebraic set Vi1 ,··· ,il defined by zi1 = · · · = zil = 0. Then Z∆ is the union
of all these subsets of Cn .
We’d better move on to examples.
• Consider the fan in figure 1, generated by 3 vectors in N ∼
= Z2 :
v1 = (1, 0),

v2 = (0, 1),

v3 = (−1, −1).

(51)

The one relation v1 + v2 + v3 = 0 gives a single charge vector (see (49))
Q = (1, 1, 1),

(52)

so we have the following group action of G = C∗ on the homogeneous coordinates:
G : (z1 , z2 , z3 ) 7→ (λz1 , λz2 , λz3 ).

(53)

Moreover, one sees that Z∆ = {(0, 0, 0)}. The construction obviously gives us CP2 as
defined earlier.
• The (singular) conifold C0 is a 3-dimensional affine variety. It is not difficult to realize
that a toric affine variety can only correspond to a single top-dimensional cone in the
fan (see below). The fan for the conifold contains 10 cones (including the 0-dimensional
one). It is generated by four lattice vectors in N ∼
= Z3 :
v1 = (0, 0, 1),

v2 = (1, 0, 1),

v3 = (1, 1, 1),

v4 = (0, 1, 1).

(54)

There is a single relation with charge vector (1, −1, 1, −1), so G is one dimensional and
acts as
G : (z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 ) 7→ (λz1 , λ−1 z2 , λz3 , λ−1 z4 ).
(55)
15

The zero set is
Z∆ = {z1 = z3 = 0} ∪ {z2 = z4 = 0}.

4.2

(56)

Coordinate rings and dual cones

The homogeneous coordinates are very useful for many purposes. However, it is natural to
ask how we can describe a toric variety in local coordinates: as for manifolds, we would like
to be able to cover our varieties with open sets equipped with local coordinates. The relevant
notion of open sets is different here from the usual topology of differential geometry6 , but
this will not concern us here. We should say, however, that because we deal with singular
spaces, the most “local” one can get is to affine varieties themselves. This is why it was
so crucial to spend some time introducing them. Moreover, because the only non-singular
affine variety is Cm itself, for non-singular varieties the relevant open sets are simply Cm and
we recover the usual notions for complex manifolds, which we used in section 3.
How do we find such local coordinates? The fan again provides the answer. To each
top-dimensional cone we associate an affine variety (affine patch). The transition functions
between these patches are also naturally encoded in the fan.
Given a single m-dimensional cone σ spanned by n vectors, we want to find the coordinate
ring associated to it. Since a toric variety is defined as a quotient by G, local coordinates
should be G-invariant polynomials7 :
x = z1n1 · · · znnn ,

G : x 7→

λ

P

which means that the positive integers ni are such that
means that we can take
ni = hw, vi i

a
i Q i ni

x = x,

a
i Qi ni = 0.

P

(57)
Because of (49), this
(58)

for any w ∈ Hom(N, Z) : The local coordinates are in one-to-one correspondence with
elements in the dual lattice M ∼
= Zm ,
M = Hom(N, Z).

(59)

In fact, the condition ni ≥ 0 defines the dual real cone σ ∨ ∈ MR ,
σ ∨ = {aw ∈ MR

| a ∈ R≥0 , hw, vi i ≥ 0 ∀vi ∈ σ}.

(60)

Then, the coordinate ring we are looking for is simply
Aσ = C[σ ∨ ∩ M].

(61)

Indeed σ ∨ ∩ M is a semi-group defining the monomials in the ring, and the addition in
σ ∨ ∩ M becomes the multiplication in the ring. One can easily write this as the quotient of
a polynomial ring by some ideals:
6

The natural topology in algebraic geometry is called the Zariski topology. See any textbook such as [19].
The reader should generalize the following considerations to the case when G has a non-trivial discrete
subgroup Γ. See the examples below.
7

16

• First, find a minimal set of lattice vectors (w1 , · · · , wr ) generating σ ∨ ∩ M; in general
this is the most tricky part of the construction. We associate to this set the polynomial
ring Rr = C[x1 , · · · , xr ].
• Find all the relations between the wi′ s, and associate to each relation an element of Rr :
X
X
Y
Y
i
i
mi wi =
mj wj , mi , mj ∈ N ⇒ p(x) =
xm
−
xm
(62)
i
i
i∈I

j∈J

i∈I

i∈J

where I ∪ J = {1, · · · , r} and I ∩ J = 0. This generates a prime ideal Pσ = (p), and
we then have
C[x1 , · · · , xr ]
Aσ = C[σ ∨ ∩ M] =
.
(63)
(p)
It is not obvious but nonetheless true that this ideal is prime, and moreover it is such that
the associated affine variety
C[x1 , · · · , xr ]
Uσ = Spec(
)
(64)
Pσ
has dimension m8 . Here we used the notation of (26).
The affine varieties Uσi , σi ∈ ∆, can be patched together to form a more general toric
variety X∆ . Suppose the cone τ is a face of both σi and σj . Then (exercice), we have that
σi,∨ j ⊂ τ ∨

⇒

C[σi,∨ j ∩ M] ⊂ C[τ ∨ ∩ M]

⇒

Uτ ⊂ Uσi ∩ Uσj .

(65)

In words, the affine set associated to the face is in the intersection of the affine sets of the
two cones. Hence the relations between local coordinates in x(i) for Uσi and x(j) for Uσj can
be read off from the relations between the generators of σi∨ ∩ M and σj∨ ∩ M:
ri
X
l=1

(i)
ql wl =

rj
X

(j)
ql′ wl′ ,

ql,l′ ∈ Z

⇒

l′ =1

ri
Y

(i)
(xl )ql =

l

rj
Y
(j)
(xl′ )ql′

(66)

l′

We see that the transition functions are always rational functions.
Examples:
• Consider again the fan for CP2 . There are three 2-dimensional cones, σ1 , σ2 , σ3 , and
for each of them
(67)
Uσi = Spec(C[σi∨ ∩ M]) ∼
= C2 .
Applying (66), we see that the transition functions between Uσ1 = (x1 , x2 ) and Uσ2 =
(y1 , y2 ), for instance, are
y1
1
x1 = ,
x2 = .
(68)
y2
y2
8

This means that the height of the ideal Pσ is always r − m.

17

(a) The toric cone

for C2 /Z2 .

(b) The toric fan for dP1 .

(c) The toric fan for dP2 .

Figure 2: Some examples of toric fans in dimension two.

• Consider the simple fan in N ∼
= Z2 shown in the Fig.2(a). It has a single top dimensional cone, spanned by
v1 = (1, 1),

et v2 = (1, −1).

(69)

Notice that there is no relation between the two vectors, so G̃ is trivial, however we do
have a discrete group Γ in the quotient (42), Γ = Z2 , since v1 and v2 only generates
half of the lattice N. In term of local coordinates, we have the dual cone σ ∨ generated
by w1 = (1, −1) and w2 = (1, 1). In order to generate the dual cone σ ∨ ∩ M (over
Z), we need to introduce a third vector w3 = (1, 0). Then, assigning homogeneous
coordinates x,y,z to these three vectors, we have the relation
w1 + w2 = 2w3

⇔

xy = z 2 .

(70)

The later equation is the algebraic definition of C2 /Z2 , seen as an affine variety.
Exercice: Make sure you can check this last claim. The Z2 group acts on C2 as
(z1 , z2 ) → (−z1 , −z2 ). You just have to build invariants under the orbifold action, and
check they indeed correspond to the above local coordinates.
• In Figures 2(b) and 2(c), we have drawn the toric fans for the first and second del
Pezzo surfaces (denoted dP1 and dP2 ). As you can see from the fan, they are smooth
surfaces (each dual cone corresponds to a C2 patch). You should be able to work out
the transition functions between the patches as in the case of CP2 .
• Exercice: Find the local coordinates for the conifold C0 using the procedure of this
subsection. You should find the affine variety (14).
Now comes an important proposition:

18

Proposition: A toric variety X∆ is compact if and only if its fan ∆ spans the whole NR .
See Chapter 2 of [14] for a proof. One sees in the above examples that CP2 and dP1,2 are
compact spaces, while C2 /Z2 or the conifold are of course not.

4.3

Calabi-Yau toric varieties

In this subsection, we show how the Calabi-Yau condition is translated into a simple condition
on the combinatoric data for X∆ .
We saw in section 3 that the Calabi-Yau condition for X is the triviality of the canonical
bundle KX . Here we show how one can express KX in term of a simple set of divisors called
toric divisors.
Definition: A toric divisor is a divisor invariant under the action of G.
Using the homogeneous coordinates (zi ), we can easily define subvarieties that are Ginvariant. Indeed, the simple algebraic sets
{(z1 , · · · , zn ) | zi = 0 ∀i ∈ I ⊂ {1, · · · , n}}.

(71)

are obviously G-invariant. In particular, the subvarieties
Di ≡ {zi = 0} ∩ X∆

(72)

are toric divisors 9 . They actually generate the full group of divisors of X∆ .
Consider X∆ smooth with canonical bundle KX . One can show that
KX = OX (−

n
X

Di ) .

(73)

i

The argument goes as follows. Because X∆ is regular, each coordinate ring Aσ is freely
generated:
Uσ ∼
= Ck × (C∗ )m−k ,

⇔

−1
Aσ = C[x1 , · · · , xk , xk+1 , x−1
k+1 , · · · , xm , xm ] .

(74)

Consider for simplicity the case k = m, which means σ is of dimension m (the generalization
is straightforward). A section of the canonical bundle is
Ω=

1
dx1 ∧ · · · ∧ dxm .
x1 · · · xm

(75)

−1
This section corresponds to a divisor. Equivalently, the dual section in KX
corresponds to
an effective divisor, described locally by

{x1 · · · xm = 0} ∩ Uσ .
9

This is because the ideal (zi ) has height one, which implies Di is codimension one in X∆ too.

19

(76)

It is called the anti-canonical divisor.
P
On the other hand, a section of the line bundle O( i Di ) corresponds to the divisor
{{z1 z2 · · · zn = 0} ∩ X} ⊂ X.

We know that
hw,v1 i

x1 · · · xm = z1

· · · znhw,vn i

with w =

m
X

wj .

(77)

(78)

j

Suppose the first m vectors amongst the vi ’s span the cone σ. Since Uσ ∼
Cm , we have
=P
hw, vii = 1 for i = 1, · · · , m.PHence the anti-canonical divisor corresponds to i Di on Uσ .
−1
This implies that KX
= O( ni Di ), which is what we wanted to show.
Exercices:
• Work out the relation explicitly for CP2 .
• Work out the relation between KX and O(−
(73) hold ?

P

i Di ) for the singular conifold C0 . Does

The important relation (73) allows us to state the Calabi-Yau condition (triviality of the
canonical bundle) in a very simple way. Note that any G-invariant function,
P as defined in
(57), is of course a section of the trivial bundle. We then see that OX ( i Di ) is trivial if
and only if
X
P a
G : z1 · · · zn 7→ λ i Qi (z1 · · · zn ) = z1 · · · zn ⇔
Qai = 0,
(79)
i

or equivalently if there exist a dual vector w ∈ M such that hw, vi i = 1 for all vi in the fan.
We then have shown the following:
Proposition: The toric variety X∆ is Calabi-Yau if and only
Pif all the vectors vi in ∆
end on the same hyperplane in N, which happens if and only if i Qai = 0 ∀a.
Remark that we chose the vi for the conifold in (54) especially to make the CY property
explicit.
It also follows from the proposition at the end of the last subsection that a toric CY cannot
be compact.

4.4

Toric diagrams and p-q webs

For toric Calabi-Yau varieties, the combinatoric information encoded in the fan can be
expressed in term of a reduced lattice of dimension m − 1.
20

(a) Toric

diagram
for the conifold.

(b) Toric

diagram

for

CC (dP1 ).

(c) Toric dia-

gram for the
SPP.

Figure 3: Some examples of toric diagrams for local CY threefolds.

(a) pq-web of the resolved

(b) pq-web of the (resolved)

conifold.

CC (dP1 ).

Figure 4: pq-webs

This is particularly convenient in order to describe toric CY threefolds (toric CY of dimension 3), which are the objects of main relevance to physics. Instead of drawing a 3dimensional fan, we can simply project it on the special plane defined by hw, vii = 1.
In the Figures are some examples of toric diagram. The one for the conifold is given in
Fig.3(a), while Fig.3(b) corresponds to the complex cone over the dP1 surface, which happens
to be a Calabi-Yau singularity.
In Fig.3(c) is a singularity called the Suspended Pinch Point (SPP). As an exercice, you
can work out the toric description of the SPP. For instance, show that in local coordinates,
the SPP is an affine variety in C4 defined by the ideal (xy − z 2 t) in C[x, y, z, t].
One can also draw the dual of the toric diagram, which is called the pq-web (simply, for
each line in the toric diagram, you draw an orthogonal line in the pq-web). Such webs have
a nice physical interpretation as webs intersecting fivebranes [20].
21

The examples of the conifold and of the first del Pezzo cone are given in Figs 4(a) and
4(b). You first have to triangulate the diagram (see next Section), and then take the dual
diagram.

5

Dealing with toric singularities

We are now ready to deal with singularities in toric geometry. In physics, singularities are
usually the signal of a breakdown of our theories: for instance the self-energy of a classical
point charge is infinite, but we know of a way to construct a coherent theory of “point
charges”, namely quantum field theory. Another class of examples, of a tougher kind, are
the classical singularities in general relativity. In that case too we expect them to be artifacts
of the classical description, while a consistent theory of quantum gravity would do away with
them.
String theory is the best candidate we have for such a quantum theory. There we know
of some phenomena of singularity resolution through quantum effects, as for instance in [21]
which crucially relied on properties of the conifold geometry.
On the other hand, from a mathematical point of view, one simple way to understand
singular spaces is to “resolve” or “deform” their singularities - we will define both these
notions momentarily. One might hope that the “slightly deformed” space is similar to the
original one: from the point of view of algebraic geometry this is wrong in general, because
that kind of singularity resolution process is hardly ever a continuous process. However, it
is often the best way we have to understand singularities.
Here we focus on the simple concepts of resolution and deformation of toric Calabi-Yau
singularities in algebraic geometry, as these processes are often good toy models of poorly
understood string theory phenomena. For instance the deformation of the conifold played a
crucial role in the extension of the AdS/CFT correspondence to more general setups [22].
What is a singularity in algebraic geometry? Let X be an algebraic variety of dimension
m. A point in X will be deemed singular if the tangent space at that point has dimension
larger than dimX = m.
Without loss of generality, we can define the tangent space Tx X at the point x for affine
varieties only:
Tangent space of X. If X = Z(J ), with J a prime ideal of Rn = C[x1 , · · · , xn ], we can
define the following ideal of Rn , generated by degree one polynomials, for each point x:
n
X

∂p
Jx =
(x) xi − xi (x) ∈ Rn | p ∈ J .
∂xi
i

(80)

This ideal generates a linear affine variety that we define to be the tangent space at x ∈ X,
Tx X ≡ Z(Jx ).
22

(81)

This obviously generalizes the usual definition of a tangent space. Now, a point x in X is
called non-singular if its tangent space has the same dimension as the variety X. Of course,
X is said to be non-singular if it has no singular points. For singular points the dimension
of Tx X is larger than m.
Exercice: Compute the tangent space of the conifold x1 x2 − x3 x4 = 0, both at the singularity xi = 0, and away from it.
Practically speaking, when given an affine variety in terms of its defining polynomials p(x)
(i.e. in local coordinates), one finds the singular locus as the set of points x such that
p(x) = 0,

dp(x) = 0 .

(82)

For toric varieties, there is a straightforward theorem [14] which states that the affine
variety Xσ associated to the cone σ is non-singular if and only if σ is generated by an integral
basis of the lattice N.
Polytope and unit simplex. In m dimensions, we will call polytope the convex hull10
of k distinct points in N ∼
= Zm . Given a m-dimensional cone σ in a toric fan, the basic
polytope is the polytope delimited by the origin and the vectors vi ∈ σ. For instance, for the
conifold we have (0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1), (1, 0, 1), (1, 1, 1), (0, 1, 1). In general we have n vectors vi ,
so we have k = n + 1 points defining the basic polytope.
On the other hand, a simplex is the m-dimensional generalization of a triangle or tetrahedron: the convex hull of m + 1 points. We define the simplicial volume of a polytope as
the number of simplexes it contains.
Indeed, any polytope can be subdivided into simplexes: this is called a simplicial decomposition. We can now reformulate the above theorem (exercice) as:
Proposition: The affine variety Xσ associated to the cone σ is non-singular if and only if
the basic polytope associated to σ ∩ N has unit simplicial volume.

5.1

Resolution of toric singularities and simplicial decomposition

We can then “desingularize” any toric variety by subdividing its associated fan further until
every cone is based on a unit simplex.
For a toric CY threefold, simplicial decomposition is equivalent to a triangulation of its
toric diagram. For instance, in Fig.3(a) one can see that the basic simplex of C0 has simplicial
volume 2, while the cone over dP1 in Fig.3(b) has simplicial volume 4, so they are singular.
The two possible triangulations of the conifold diagram are shown in Figure 5.
10

As one can find in Wikipedia.org, for instance, a convex hull of k points is the minimal convex set
containing these points. This is just the higher dimensional generalization of 2-dimensional polygons and
3-dimensional polyhedrons.

23

Figure 5: The two possible resolutions of the conifold.

Example. Take the conifold again. Its basic simplex has volume 2. We can split it into
a fan containing two cones, each of unit volume. This is called the resolved conifold. Now
we have two 3-dimensional cones in the fan, σ1 and σ2 . The dual cones correspond to two
copies of C3 :
σ1∨
σ2∨

:
:

{(1, 0, 0), (0, −1, 1), (−1, 1, 0)}
{(0, 1, 0), (−1, 0, 1), (1, −1, 0)}

→ C3 = {x1 , y1, z1 },
→ C3 = {x2 , y2, z2 },

(83)
(84)

We see that the relations between the vectors in the dual lattice give us the following transition functions between the two patches:
z1 =

1
,
z2

x1
x2
= ,
y1
y2

x1 z1 = x2 ,

etc.

(85)

The second relation is actually the defining equation of the conifold singularity. Before the
triangulation of the toric diagram, that was all what one would get. The triangulation
procedure introduced new coordinates, z1 and z2 with z1 = 1/z2 , which give the complex
structure of a CP1 . Away from the point x1 = y1 = x2 = y2 = 0, these coordinates are
redundant, but at the former conifold singularity, we now have a full CP1 .
Remark that in the homogeneous coordinate description, you still have the same four coordinates z1 , · · · z4 . What changes is that the zero set Z∆ is now different when the fan is
subdivided: Z∆ = {z1 = z2 = z3 = z4 = 0}, so that the singularity is effectively removed.
Such a procedure, which replaces an isolated singularity by a holomorphic cycle, is called
a resolution of the singularity.
More precisely [13], a resolution (X̃, π) of the variety X is a non-singular variety X̃ together
with a surjective map π : X̃ → X which is biholomorphic on open sets wherever π is also
injective. In other words, π is a biholomorphism “away” from the singular points, while the
singularities are replaced by some smooth spaces, for instance by means of a small resolution,
or by blowing them up.
Blow up. A blow up is a procedure which replaces the singular locus of X by CPm−1 .
(Beware that in the physics literature the terms “blow up” is sometimes used to designate
24

any kind of resolution.) Hence a blow up introduces new divisors, called exceptional divisors
(these are defined as the prime divisors E ⊂ X̃ such that π(E) has codimension 2 or more
in X).
Small resolution. On the other hand, a small resolution is a resolution such that X̃ has
no exceptional divisors. In particular, the resolution of the conifold is a small resolution.
The resolutions we usually deal with in string theory are actually crepant resolutions. The
resolution (X̃, π) of X is said to be crepant when11
π ∗ (O(KX )) = O(KX̃ ).

(86)

In particular, the Calabi-Yau condition is preserved by a crepant resolution.
For a toric CY threefold, a blow up consists in introducing a CP2 at the singularity, while a
small resolution introduces a CP1 instead. You can convince yourself (exercice) that the blow
up corresponds to adding an internal point in the toric diagram (see the pq-web Fig.4(b) for
instance), while the small resolution corresponds to a triangulation which does not introduce
new points (like for the conifold).

5.2

Deformation of toric singularities: the versal space

Another way to get rid of a singularity is to deform it: this modifies the complex structure.
For instance, we saw that the conifold equation x1 x2 − x3 x4 = 0 admits a deformation to
x1 x2 − x3 x4 = e,

e 6= 0.

(87)

This new space, called the deformed conifold, is non-singular. The complex structure has
obviously changed, but it turns out that it is still a Calabi-Yau variety. However, it is not
toric anymore, because the deformation has broken one of the C∗ action in the T3 acting
on the singular conifold (as one can see from the equation). In this particular case, the
Calabi-Yau metric is explicitly known [2] .
It turns out that for any deformation of the defining polynomials which is of degree lower
or equal to these same polynomials, the resulting deformed variety is still Calabi-Yau. Of
course in general we don’t know the Ricci-flat metric on it, but the CY theorem guarantees
its existence.
11

The canonical bundle for a singular variety is itself tricky to define. A straightforward generalisation of
the idea of holomorphic line bundle is what is called an invertible sheaf (which is a sheaf of modules locally
isomorphic to the structure sheaf OX ). Then one works with the sheaf O(KX ), the sheaf of regular sections
of KX , which is assumed to be invertible. You can pull-back this sheaf using π, but in general π ∗ (O(KX ))
is not equal to O(KX̃ ). It turns out that the discrepancy can come from exceptional divisors only, and if
there is no discrepancy the resolution is said to be crepant (so we see that small resolutions are crepant by
definition).

25

Figure 6: Splitting of the conifold diagram into Minkowski summands.

Figure 7: Splitting of the CC (dP2) diagram into Minkowsky summands. The triangle corresponds to a remaining singularity which admits no complex deformation.

Since we are dealing here with non-compact CY varieties, we also should not modify the
boundary conditions at infinity. This means that we focus on normalizable deformations,
which are those which do not change the defining polynomials at infinity.
Exercice. Consider the following variety (called the “suspended pinch point”, or SPP),
x1 x2 − x3 (x4 )2 = 0.

(88)

Show that its singular locus is the line
x1 = x2 = x4 = 0, ∀x3 .

(89)

Find all the deformations (and check if it is normalizable)
For a single intersection variety like the one above, it is easy to work out by hand all
the possible deformations. For more complicated varieties, however, it becomes tedious.
Also, for non-complete intersection varieties 12 , it may happen that there is no consistent
modification of the defining equations.
For toric varieties, there exists a very useful algorithm, due to Altmann [23], which gives the
number of normalizable deformations of the singularity for any isolated toric CY singularity
12

One talks of non-complete intersection when the dimension of the embedding space Cn minus the number
of defining polynomials is smaller than the dimension of X. It is the general case. (In algebraic language, it
means that the height of the defining ideal is smaller than the number of generating polynomials.)

26

(and also their explicit form, see [23], or [24, 25] for some physics papers which use it in
detail).13 We will focus on CY threefolds, that we can draw as toric diagrams on a sheet of
paper, and where all the interesting phenomenons occur.
The various complex deformations of an isolated CY singularity correspond to the possible
“Minkowski decompositions” of the toric diagram. This means that we deform the toric
diagram into closed sub-diagrams (called Minkowski summands). See Figures 6 and 7. What
we are really looking for are the “breathing modes” of the toric diagram. We do it in the
following way:
• Consider an affine toric Calabi-Yau threefold, with its toric diagram D containing n
points and n edges. First, assign to each edge of D ⊂ Z2 a lattice vector
d i = ph − pt ,

(90)

given by the difference between the head and the tail of the corresponding edge of D,
when going in the counterclockwise direction.
• Define the vector space
n
X

V (D) = (t1 , · · · , tn ) |
ti di = 0 .

(91)

i

This vector space, including the trivial (t, t, t, t) component, is obviously of dimension
n − 2. Ignoring the trivial rescaling, this is the linearized space of deformations of X,
of dimension n − 3. The deformation could be obstructed at second order, however.
• The versal 14 space of complex deformations of X is defined by the following ideal of
C[t1 , · · · , tn ]:
n


X
J = pk ≡
(ti )k di | k ∈ Z>0 .
(92)
i

Actually this ideal is generated by the finite set of polynomials p1 , · · · , pK , where K is
the maximum of the lattice width of the minimal pair of strips containing D [23].
This whole procedure amounts to find the Minkowski summands of the diagram D. In
term of the dual pq-web, it corresponds to splitting the pq-web into sub-webs in equilibrium
(i.e. the external legs must still sum to zero). For instance, you can see that the diagram in
Fig.3(b) admits no Minkowski decomposition. This means that the dP1 singularity cannot
be deformed: although its linear space of deformations (91) has dimension one, there is an
obstruction at second order.
13

Notice that the SPP in the example above is not an isolated singularities: it has a full C worth of
singularities, a singularity line.
14
“Versal space” means that all the possible deformations are there, but that the same deformation might
appear several times (if it appear only once we would have a “universal” space of deformation, that is what
happens for compact Calabi-Yau varieties, whose complex moduli space has a simpler topology. See [13].).

27

Example. Consider the conifold, whose diagram is just a square. We have the following
edge vectors:
d1 = (1, 0), d2 = (0, 1), d3 = (−1, 0), d4 = (0, −1) .
(93)
The linear space of deformation is simply generated by (t1 , t2 , t1 , t2 ). There is no higher order
obstruction so the versal space boils down to the linear space
Spec(C[t]) = C ,

(94)

corresponding to the freedom of adding a constant term e in (87).
Exercice. Work out the versal space of deformations for the complex cone over dP2 . (See
Section 4 of [24] and Appendix B of [25] for more details.)

6

Toric geometry 2: Gauged linear sigma-model

There is an alternative, complementary approach to toric varieties, which does not directly
rely on algebraic geometry, but rather deals with the symplectic or (more precisely) Kähler
properties of our varieties.
The idea is to split the quotient by (C∗ )n−m in (42) into two steps. Since
C∗ ∼
= U(1) × R>0 ,

(95)

we will first fix some “point” t ∈ R>0 (and t → 0 will correspond to a singular limit for the
toric variety), and secondly we will divide by the U(1) action (which is the gauge group,
in the physics parlance). Such a procedure is well defined because we have a well defined
Kähler form on the parent space Cn . It is called a Kähler quotient of Cn .

6.1

Kähler quotient and moment maps

Before exploring the “physics”, let us briefly explain what is a Kähler quotient mathematically. We will focus on the quotient of Cn by an abelian group. The group G = U(1)r
(r = n − m) acts on Cn as (compare to (48))
U(1)r : Cn → Cn

(zi ) 7→ (ei

:

P

a
a ξa Qi

zi ),

(96)

where ξ = (ξ1 , · · · , ξr ) are element of the Lie algebra g = u(1)r ∼
= Rr of the gauge group.
The action of g is then
ξ · F (z) = i

XX
i

ξa Qai zi

a

∂
+ c.c.)F (z).
∂zi

The complex conjugate is necessary to make it a real action.
28

(97)

Definition:
Given a Kähler manifold with Kähler 2-form ω, a moment map µ for the
group action of G on Cn is an element of the dual Lie algebra, g ∗ , such that
dhµ, ξi ≡ d(µa ξa ) = iξ ω,

(98)

where here iξ denote the interior product with the vector ξ appearing on the r.h.s. of (97).
Exercice. Guess why it is called a moment map. (Hint: the function µa ξa can be seen as a
Hamiltonian on a symplectic manifold describing a phase-space in classical mechanics.) You
could also check that the existence of a moment map implies that the G-action preserves ω
as well as the complex structure (the Lie derivative of both w.r.t. ξ being zero), so that the
elements of g really correspond to holomorphic Killing vectors.
You can easily show that, in our case, the Kähler manifold being simply Cn with the
canonical Kähler form
X
ω = −i
dzi ∧ dz̄i ,
(99)
i

the moment maps are
µa =

X

Qai |zi |2 − ta ,

(100)

i

where the ta are integration constants. Then, the Kähler quotient proceeds as follows:
• Set µa = 0, i.e.
X

Qai |zi |2 = ta

∀a,

(101)

i

This is called a restriction to a level set at level t. The parameters ta could be set to
zero, as we will see.
• The second step is to quotient by the compact gauge group U(1)r , whose action was
defined in (96).
The first step defines a lower-dimensional real algebraic submanifold in the space Rn≥0
spanned by the |zi |’s. Then the second step tells us which subgroup U(1)m of the U(1)n ⊂ Cn
torus must be fibered at each point to produce the final m-dimensional variety.

6.2

The GLSM story

If your are familiar with supersymmetric theories (or you have read the introduction carefully), the above must have looked like known territory. The restriction to a level set is
simply the imposition of the D-term constraints in some abelian gauge theory, while the
second steps corresponds to fixing the gauge freedom (restricting to gauge orbits).

29

Hence, we can see toric varieties as the moduli space of vacua of a “gauged linear sigmamodel” (GLSM). We have n chiral fields whose scalar component are the zi ’s, and they are
charged under the gauge group as
U(1)1
..
.
U(1)r

z1
Q11

···
···
..
.

zn
Q1n

FI
t1
..
.

Qr1

···

Qrn

tr

Because the gauge group is U(1)r , there are possible Fayet-Iliopoulos (FI) parameters ta in
the D-terms conditions (101). This was first realised by Witten in [26], where he used a
2-dimensional GLSM as an auxiliary device to find 2-dimensional CFTs. Here the auxiliary
theory is four dimensional (the main difference with respect to [26] being that the FI parameters are real), and its infrared corresponds to a Calabi-Yau “as probed by D3-branes”15 .
Examples. Consider the GLSM with a single U(1) and four fields with the following
charges:
z1 z2
z3
z4
U(1) p p −p + q −p − q
and no FI term. The resulting toric Calabi-Yau singularity is a real cone over a real 5dimensional Sasaki-Einstein16 space called Y p,q [27]. This family of toric CY singularities
has received a lot a attention in the physics litterature during the last years, because the
corresponding Ricci-flat metrics are known explicitly [28], which is a rather spectacular feat
and allowed for some new checks of the AdS/CFT correspondence.
Exercice: Check that the complex cone over dP1 discussed before is actually the real cone
over Y 2,1 . It suffices to find the GLSM charges from the toric diagram in Fig.3(b).

6.3

Toric varieties as torus fibration of polytopes

An affine toric variety X can be visualized quite simply as a torus fibration over a polytope
∆:
µH
U(1)m → X −→ ∆
(102)
Indeed, the toric variety X has an isometry group
H = U(1)m =
15

U(1)n
,
U(1)r

(103)

You should not take this analogy too seriously: the GLSM is an auxiliary construction, like the fan,
there is a priori no real physics there.
16
Sasaki basically means that the real 6-dimensional cone is Kähler, while the Einstein condition on the
5-dimensional base metric implies the Ricci-flatness of the cone. Hence a SE manifold of real dimension
2n − 1 is the real base of a CY cone of complex dimension n.

30

and there is a moment map µH on X associated to this H. This moment map is precisely
the map which projects out the U(1)m fibers in the exact short sequence (102) [27].
For cones (ta = 0), the polytope is precisely the toric cone σ for X. Given the charge
vectors Qa , one can construct several σ’s such that
X

σ = Span((vi ) ∈ N ∼
Qai vi ∀a .
(104)
= Zm ) |
i

All these σ are related to each other by Sl(m, Z) transformations. Consider, for instance,
taking an orthogonal basis of Zm for the first m lattice vectors vi (corresponding to the first
m homogeneous coordinates). The remaining vectors of σ follow from (49). This choice of
lattice basis vectors corresponds to a choice of subgroup for
U(1)m ⊂ U(1)n .

(105)

This is simply because we made a choice about which of the homogeneous coordinates (zi )
are the “dependent” ones. Here we chose the variables (zm+1 , · · · , zn ) to be functions of the
(z1 , · · · , zm ). More precisely, the modulus are fixed by the D-terms (101), while the phases
of (zm+1 , · · · , zn ) are redundant U(1)r degrees of freedom that we can gauge fix.
Then we see explicitly that the affine toric variety is realized as a U(1)m fibration of
σ ⊂ NR . In the bulk, the real torus T m ∼
= U(1)m is non-degenerate, while on the intersection
of the hyperplane (vj = 0, ∀j ∈ I ⊂ (1, · · · m)) with the cone σ, there is a degeneration of
1
the (#I)-torus (Tj11 × · · · × T(#I)
). At the tip of σ the whole torus shrinks to zero, and we
have a singularity.
Example. Take the conifold again. We have Q = (1, −1, 1, −1). If we take a basis of Z3
as (0, 0, 1), (0, 1, 1) and (1, 1, 1), we must have that the fourth vector in σ be (1, 0, 1). On
the other hand, if we take the orthogonal basis for the lattice, σ is generated by
(1, 0, 0),

(0, 1, 0),

(0, 0, 1),

(1, −1, 1).

We see that the first σ is obtained from the second by the Sl(3, Z) transformation


0 1 1
 0 0 1 .
1 1 1

(106)

(107)

Exercise: work out the different ways the torus T 3 degenerates on the boundaries of σ.
When ta 6= 0 for some a’s, we have a (possibly partially) resolved singularity. From the
polytope point of view, the resolution amounts to “chopping off” the tip of σ, since we
cannot reach the point z1 = · · · = zn = 0 anymore (Exercise: visualize this for the conifold.)
As an aside, let us note the interesting relation between the parameter ta and the period of
31

the Kähler form on the corresponding 2-cycle C a (in the case of a small resolution by a CP1 )
[12] :
Z
ω = ta .

(108)

Ca

So the FI parameters in the GLSM really map to the “Kähler volumes” of the resolving
cycles.
The GLSM perspective is very interesting in order to explore the topology of toric varieties,
and it is “easier” because more explicit. One can easily visualize toric divisors and compute
their intersections using the GLSM. Nice reviews exist in the physics literature on this part
of the story. See in particular: [12], [9], and the chapter 7 of [29].

Parting words
Hundreds or thousands of physics papers on the gauge/gravity correspondence and on other
subjects use some toric geometry tools. It is my hope that these lectures will have helped
other graduate students to contextualize this beautiful subject.
In particular, one cannot underestimate the power of algebraic geometry. Hence we emphasized the algebraic concepts, in their most hands-on form, since this subject is not often
known to graduate students of Physics.

Acknowledgements
I thank the Gods of String Theory to have led me to this hellish world of theirs. I thank
the organisers of the Modave Summer School 2008 for giving me the opportunity to lecture
on toric geometry in a relaxed environment. I would like to thank the participants of the
schools for the warm atmosphere, and in particular I am grateful to A. Bernamonti, J. Evslin,
S. Kuperstein and V. Wens for interesting discussions. I thank R. Argurio and F. Dehouck
for proofreading and commenting on a previous version of these notes. These lectures are
to be published in the Modave Summer School Proceedings 2008. C.C. is supported by the
Belgian scholarship “bourse de doctorat F.R.S. - FNRS”.

A

A few notions of algebra

We just need a few definitions and propositions (without demonstration). For more details,
see any algebraic geometry textbook, such as [19].
Ring. A ring is a set R equipped with two binary operations, + and ·, such that
(i) (R, +) is a commutative group,
(ii) · is associative and there exist a neutral element (called unity). If moreover · is commutative we talk of a commutative ring (it is the case in these lectures).
32

(iii) · is distributive over + .
Examples: The sel of all integers Z is a ring. Another example is the ring of polynomials
in n variables, denoted C[x1 , · · · , xn ].
Ideal. An ideal I of a ring R is a subset I ⊂ R such that
(i) i, j ∈ I ⇒ i − j ∈ I,
(ii) i ∈ I, r ∈ R ⇒ ir ∈ I.
Proposition:

I an ideal of R implies that the quotient R/I is a ring too.

Notation: Given a set of elements {r1 , · · · , rk } ⊂ R, we denote (r1 , · · · , rk ) the ideal
generated by this set, which is the smallest ideal of R containing {r1 , · · · , rk }.
Prime ideal. An ideal P ⊂ R is a prime ideal if for any ideals I, J ⊂ R,
I · J = {ij ∈ R | i ∈ I, j ∈ J} ⊂ P ⇒ I ⊂ P

or J ⊂ P.

Exemple: In the ring C[x, y], the ideal (xy) is not prime. It has a primary decomposition
into (x) and (y).
Radical of an ideal. Let I be an ideal of R. The radical of I, denoted rad(I), is the
intersection of all the prime ideals containing I. (rad(I) is itself an ideal.)
Example: In C[x, y], rad((xn y m)) = (xy).
An ideal I ⊂ R is said to be radical if rad(I) = I.
Height of a prime ideal. The height h(P ) of a prime ideal P ⊂ R is the largest integer
h such that there exist a chain of strict inclusions of prime ideals Pi
P0 ⊂ P1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Ph = P .

(109)

It gives a notion of the dimension of an ideal. Moreover it can be shown that the dimension
of the affine variety corresponding to the quotient ring C[x1 , · · · , xn ]/P is n − h(P ).
Zero divisor and integral domain. An element r ∈ R, r 6= 0, is called a zero divisor
if there exists s ∈ R, s 6= 0, such that rs = 0. A commutative ring without zero divisor is
called an integral domain.
Proposition: Given R an integral domain, and I ⊂ R an ideal, then R/I is an integral
domain if and only if I is prime.
33

A.1

Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz

Consider an ideal I of C[x1 , · · · , xn ]. Given the algebraic subset Z(I) ⊂ Cn , as defined in
section 2.1, is the knowledge of Z(I) enough to reconstruct the ideal I? The answer is that
you can only find rad(I). This is the content of the famous Hilbert’s Nullstellensatz. More
precisely:
Theorem. For any ideal I of C[x1 , · · · , xn ],
J (Z(I)) = rad(I),
where J (Z(I)) is the set of all polynomials vanishing on Z(I).

References
[1] P. Candelas, P. S. Green and T. Hubsch, “Finite Distances Between Distinct CalabiYau Vacua: (Other Worlds Are Just Around The Corner),” Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989)
1956.
[2] P. Candelas and X. C. de la Ossa, “Comments on Conifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 342 (1990)
246.
[3] P. Candelas, P. S. Green and T. Hubsch, “Rolling Among Calabi-Yau Vacua,” Nucl.
Phys. B 330, 49 (1990).
[4] R. Argurio, G. Ferretti and R. Heise, “An introduction to supersymmetric gauge theories
and matrix models,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 19 (2004) 2015 [arXiv:hep-th/0311066].
[5] A. Bilal, “Introduction to supersymmetry,” arXiv:hep-th/0101055.
[6] M. A. Luty and W. Taylor, “Varieties of vacua in classical supersymmetric gauge theories,” Phys. Rev. D 53 (1996) 3399 [arXiv:hep-th/9506098].
[7] J. Gray, A. Hanany, Y. H. He, V. Jejjala and N. Mekareeya, “SQCD: A Geometric
Apercu,” JHEP 0805 (2008) 099 [arXiv:0803.4257 [hep-th]].
[8] B. R. Greene, “String theory on Calabi-Yau manifolds,” arXiv:hep-th/9702155.
[9] M.
Kreuzer,
“Toric
arXiv:hep-th/0612307.

Geometry

and

Calabi-Yau

Compactifications,”

[10] V. Bouchard, “Lectures on complex geometry, Calabi-Yau manifolds and toric geometry,” arXiv:hep-th/0702063.
[11] T. Hubsch, “Calabi-Yau manifolds: A Bestiary for physicists,” Singapore, Singapore:
World Scientific (1992) 362 p
34

[12] F. Denef, “Les Houches Lectures on Constructing String Vacua,” arXiv:0803.1194 [hepth].
[13] D. Joyce, “Compact manifolds with special holonomy,” 436 pages, Oxford Mathematical
Monographs series, OUP, 2000.
[14] W. Fulton, “Introduction to Toric Varieties”, Princeton University Press, 1993.
[15] D. Cox, “Recent developments in toric geometry”, arXiv:alg-geom/9606016.
[16] H. Skarke, “String
arXiv:hep-th/9806059.

dualities

and

toric

geometry:

An

introduction,”

[17] E. Sharpe, “Lectures on D-branes and sheaves,” arXiv:hep-th/0307245.
[18] P. S. Aspinwall, “D-branes on Calabi-Yau manifolds,” arXiv:hep-th/0403166.
[19] P. Griffiths, J. Harris, “Principles of Algebraic Geometry”, Wiley, 1978.
[20] O. Aharony, A. Hanany and B. Kol, “Webs of (p,q) 5-branes, five dimensional field
theories and grid diagrams,” JHEP 9801 (1998) 002 [arXiv:hep-th/9710116].
[21] A. Strominger, “Massless black holes and conifolds in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 451
(1995) 96 [arXiv:hep-th/9504090].
[22] I. R. Klebanov and M. J. Strassler, “Supergravity and a confining gauge theory: Duality cascades and chiSB-resolution of naked singularities,” JHEP 0008 (2000) 052
[arXiv:hep-th/0007191].
[23] K. Altmann, “The versal Deformation of an isolated toric Gorenstein Singularity,”
arXiv:alg-geom/9403004.
[24] S. Pinansky, “Quantum deformations from toric geometry,” JHEP 0603 (2006) 055
[arXiv:hep-th/0511027].
[25] R. Argurio and C. Closset, “A Quiver of Many Runaways,” JHEP 0709, 080 (2007)
[arXiv:0706.3991 [hep-th]].
[26] E. Witten, “Phases of N = 2 theories in two dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 403 (1993)
159 [arXiv:hep-th/9301042].
[27] D. Martelli and J. Sparks, “Toric geometry, Sasaki-Einstein manifolds and a new infinite
class of AdS/CFT duals,” Commun. Math. Phys. 262 (2006) 51 [arXiv:hep-th/0411238].
[28] J. P. Gauntlett, D. Martelli, J. Sparks and D. Waldram, “Sasaki-Einstein metrics on
S(2) x S(3),” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 8 (2004) 711 [arXiv:hep-th/0403002].
[29] K. Hori et al., “Mirror symmetry,” Providence, USA: AMS (2003) 929 p.

35

